GOOD EVENING, EVERYONE AND
WELCOME WELCOME TO THE APRIL 21
MEETING OF THE ANN ARBOR CITY
COUNCIL.
IF YOU'RE ABLE PLEASE RISE AND
JOIN US FOR A MOMENT OF SILENCE
AT THIS TIME IT'S ALSO PERHAPS
APPROPRIATE TO REFLECT UPON THE
PASSING OF SHIRLEY BECKLEY, A
LONG STANDING ANN ARBOR
RESIDENT ACTIVE IN FURTHERANCE
OF OUR COMMUNITY AS A WHOLE
WITH AND OF COURSE WITH
PARTICULARITY TO OUR
AFRICAN-AMERICAN COMMUNITY.
SHE WAS A MEMBER OF OUR
COMMUNITY OF LONG STANDING AND
HER VOICE WILL BE MISSED
TO THE
FLAG OF THE UNITED STATES
OF AMERICA AND TO THE REPUBLIC
FOR WHICH IT STANDS ONE NATION
UNDER GOD INDIVISIBLE WITH
LIBERTY AND JUSTICE FOR ALL
WHAT OUR CLARK PLEASE CALL THE
ROLE OF COUNSEL THAT'S MEMBER
DISH HERE.
THAT'S WHERE HARRISON HERE
CUSTOMER WATSON HERE COMES FROM
HERE IT'S OVER DENHA HERE
FELSBERG 01 HERE.
MAYOR TAYLOR HERE.
WE'RE HERE WE'RE HERE SWARBRICK
HERE ELSEWHERE KORNEL HERE WE
HAVE A QUORUM.
>> WE HAVE A MOTION TO APPROVE
THE AGENDA MOVE BY COUNCILMAN
OR SECOND BY COUNCIL MEMBER
DISH DISCUSSION OF THE AGENDA,
PERHAPS THE MOTION PLEASE TO
MOVE DC FOR THE RESOLUTION TO
FINALIZE THE EVALUATION REPORT
AMENDMENT AND TO AMEND THE
EMPLOYMENT AGREEMENT.
>> THE CITY ATTORNEY TO AFTER
OUR CLOSED SESSION WHICH I
SUSPECT WILL BE A DISCUSSION
OF THE CITY ATTORNEY'S
EVALUATION.
WE HAVE A MOTION PLEASE FOR
THAT CHANGE MOVE BY COUNCILOR
WATSON ABOUT COUNCILOR HARRISON
DISCUSSION OR FAVOR OPPOSED THE
AMENDMENT IS APPROVED FURTHER
DISCUSSION OF THE AGENDA AS
AMENDED IN FAVOR OR OPPOSED IT
IS APPROVED.
I BELIEVE WE HAVE THE PLEASURE
OF COMMUNICATIONS FROM OUR CITY
ADMINISTRATOR TODAY
.
GOOD EVENING, MAYOR.
MEMBERS OF COUNCIL.
IT'S MY PLEASURE STANDING
BEFORE YOU REPRESENTING THE
ADMINISTRATION TO PRESENT TO
YOU OUR BALANCED CITY
ADMINISTRATOR HAS PROPOSED
BUDGET FOR F WIDE TWENTY SIX
TWENTY SEVEN.
IT WAS A STRUGGLE TRYING TO
FIGURE OUT HOW TO BRING
EVERYTHING TOGETHER
TO SOME
KIND OF THEME THAT MADE SENSE.
THIS IS THE STATE OF OUR
ENVIRONMENT POLICY REVERSALS,
SUPPLY CHAIN ISSUES ESCALATING
COST POTENTIAL FUNDING LOSS
DIVIDING COMMUNITIES.
WE'RE STRUGGLING TO UNDERSTAND
A DEFINITE DIRECTION AND
RESIDENT UNEASINESS.
WE COULD BE OVERWHELMED BY ANY
ONE OF THOSE THINGS ON ANY
GIVEN DAY.
WHAT IS THE ADMINISTRATION'S
POSITION THAT REGARDLESS OF THE
STATE OF THE ENVIRONMENT WE
HAVE TO PERFORM THROUGH
UNCERTAINTY?
IT SIMPLY COMES DOWN TO WHAT DO
WE HAVE AND WHAT CAN WE DO?
>> THE FOUNDATIONS OF THE
DECISION MAKING THAT GOES INTO
THIS BUDGET BASED UPON A
PREMISE YOU'VE SEEN THIS SLIDE
BEFORE THE CFO PRESENTED IT IN
ONE OF OUR RECENT WORK
SESSIONS.
WE ARE PROJECTING AN INCREASE
OF REAL AND PERSONAL PROPERTY
TAX JUST UNDER SIX PERCENT AND
BY TWENTY SEVEN TO THIRTY THAT
DROPS TO THREE PERCENT BUT WE
ARE APPROPRIATE CONSERVATIVE
WHEN IT COMES TO OUR
FORECASTING.
THE PICTURE GETS BETTER.
WE DO BETTER IF IT DOESN'T WE
FIND A WAY TO MANAGE STATE
SHARED REVENUE THE LAST SEVERAL
YEARS HAS BEEN FLAT.
>> I'LL TALK A LITTLE BIT MORE
ABOUT THAT IN A MINUTE.
>> PARKING REVENUES HAVE NOW
RETURNED TO THE PRE PANDEMIC
LEVELS WHICH SAYS PEOPLE ARE
OUT, PEOPLE ARE GOING ABOUT
THEIR BUSINESS, PEOPLE ARE
ENGAGING PARTICULARLY IN THE
DOWNTOWN AREA REGARDLESS OF OUR
QUEST TO FIND HOW A.I. FITS
INTO OUR FUTURE REGARDLESS
OF OUR QUEST TO DETERMINE WHAT
OTHER TECHNOLOGICAL ADVANCES
COULD BE MADE TO HELP THE
ORGANIZATION THE BACKBONE
OF THIS MUNICIPAL ORGANIZATION
ARE THE PROFESSIONALS THAT SHOW
UP EVERY DAY IN ORDER TO GET
THE WORK DONE AND THERE IS THAT
IS THE APPROPRIATE PLACE WHERE
THE LARGEST EXPENDITURE IS MADE
WITHIN THE GOVERNMENT FLEET
COST ARE EXPLODING.
I'LL TALK A BIT MORE ABOUT THAT
IN JUST A SECOND.
IN TWENTY TWENTY FOUR WHEN WE
WERE INFORMED THAT OUR BOND
RATING HAD BEEN ESCALATED TO
TRIPLE-A WE WERE ONE OF ONLY
NINE COMMUNITIES IN MICHIGAN TO
REACH THAT STATUS.
MARTY AND I ARE DETERMINED TO
EXAMINE EACH AND EVERY MEASURE
THAT FLOWS INTO THAT TO ENSURE
THAT THE TRIPLE-A STATUS IS
MAINTAINED.
SO WE EVALUATE EVERY
TRANSACTION.
WE LOOK AT THE FACTORS AT THE
RATING AGENCIES LOOK AT TO MAKE
SURE THAT WE'RE DOING WHAT WE
CAN TO STAY AT THE AAA STATUS
THAT HELPS THE GOVERNMENT TO
FUNCTION AND ULTIMATELY IT
HELPS THE COMMUNITY HELPS US TO
BE ABLE TO DELIVER A HIGHER
LEVEL OF SERVICE BECAUSE OF THE
TRIPLE-A RATING WE'RE
PRESENTING TO YOU A PROPOSED
BUDGET TOTAL SIX HUNDRED THIRTY
SEVEN MILLION SEVEN HUNDRED
SIXTEEN THOUSAND SEVEN HUNDRED
EIGHTY EIGHT OVER A CUP
OF COFFEE.
I DO INTEND TO ASK MR. SOMAYA
WHY NOT 789 IS KIND
OF INTERESTING THAT WE BUDGET
RIGHT DOWN TO THE DOLLAR BUT
THAT'S WHERE IT IS THE GENERAL
FUND WHERE THE BASIC BREAD AND
BUTTER OPERATIONS OF THE
GOVERNMENT HAPPEN AND THAT
PROPOSED FIGURE IS ONE HUNDRED
AND FORTY SIX MILLION SIX FIFTY
THREE SIX SEVENTY ONE GIVEN
THAT I'VE BEEN HERE NOW
APPROACHING FOUR YEARS YOU KNOW
THAT I'M NOT GOING TO STAND
HERE AND JUST READ YOU A BUNCH
OF NUMBERS.
I'M GOING TO GIVE YOU MORE
INSIGHT INTO THE WHY AND THE
WHAT THE PRINTED BOOK WILL HAVE
ALL THE DETAILS THAT YOU WILL
NEED AS I STAND HERE WE ARE
AWAITING DECISION MAKING IN
LANSING.
THE NARRATIVE IS THAT COMMUNITY
USE ARE GOING TO GET A HIGHER
SHARE OF STATE SHARED REVENUE.
WE DON'T KNOW WHEN WE DON'T
KNOW HOW MUCH WE DON'T KNOW
WHEN WE WOULD GET IT.
WE HAD TO CLOSE THE BUDGET
SEVERAL WEEKS BEFORE TONIGHT IN
ORDER TO MAKE IT FIT.
SO WE'VE INSERTED A COUPLE
OF CONTINGENCY INSERT AND I'LL
GIVE YOU AN EXAMPLE OF THAT AS
WE MOVE THROUGH SO THAT IF WE
GET CERTAIN FUNDING FROM THE
STATE IT WILL ENABLE US TO TAKE
ADDITIONAL STEPS.
WE'VE ALREADY GIVEN SOME
THOUGHT TO WHAT THOSE
ADDITIONAL STEPS WOULD BE
PURSUING LEGISLATIVELY DIRECTED
FUNDING.
>> WE LIKE THE TERM EARMARKS.
NOBODY SAYS THAT OR PEOPLE SAY
THAT.
SO WHAT YOU'RE SEEING ARE THE
STRATEGIES FOR BOTH STATE AND
FEDERAL FUNDING.
THIS IS NOT NECESSARILY THE
PRIORITY LIST THAT WE WOULD
PRESENT IF WE WERE JUST GOING
FROM SCRATCH THESE OTHER
PRIORITIES AS ADVISED TO BE
CONSISTENT IN PRAGMATIC TERMS
WITH THE AUTHORITIES OF THE DAY
ON THE STATE SIDE SIX MILLION
DOLLARS FOR BOLLARDS.
IT'S AN EXPENSIVE PROJECT BUT
WE BELIEVE IT'S NECESSARY WE
CANNOT BE TONE DEAF TO WHAT
HAPPENED IN NEW ORLEANS.
WE HOLD HUNDREDS OF ORGANIZED
EVENTS EVERY YEAR, A LOT
OF THEM IN DOWNTOWN IF WE GET
THE FUNDING FOR THIS PROJECT IT
WOULD BE IMPLEMENTED THROUGH
THE DHS LEADERSHIP.
WE WOULD BE ABLE TO PROVIDE
BOLLARDS AT APPROXIMATELY
TWENTY ONE INTERSECTIONS IN THE
DOWNTOWN AREA AND IF WE WERE
ABLE TO GET THIS PROJECT
IMPLEMENTED IT WOULD MAKE SENSE
THAT WE WOULD DRIVE FUTURE
SPECIAL EVENTS TO THE AREAS
WITH THE BOLLARDS ARE.
SO THAT'S THE CONVERSATION
WE'RE HAVING BECAUSE OF THE
HOTEL THAT'S GOING UP ACROSS
FROM CITY HALL.
IT'S BEEN POINTED OUT THAT THE
HOTEL WOULD HAVE ROOMS THAT'S
DIRECT DIRECTLY IN THE
SIGHTLINE OF THE PROBATION
OFFICE AND THE JUDICIAL OFFICES
.
I WISH IT WEREN'T SO BUT WE
HAVE TO EVALUATE RISK AND SO
WE'RE ASKING STATE FUNDING
SEVEN HUNDRED FORTY THOUSAND
DOLLARS IN ORDER FOR US TO
APPLY A PROTECTIVE GLASS TO THE
UPPER FLOORS OF THE JUSTICE
CENTER ON THE FEDERAL SIDE
WE'RE SEEKING TWELVE MILLION
FOR OUR STATION THREE YOU'RE
AWARE THAT YOU BUT WE'RE ALL
AWARE THAT YOU'VE ALREADY
APPROVED FUNDING FOR OUR
STATION FOR OUR STATIONS.
WE HAVEN'T BUILT ONE SINCE
NINETEEN EIGHTY ONE.
SO ABOUT FORTY PLUS YEARS WE'RE
STILL IN THE THROES OF TRYING
TO DO BARTON DAM IMPROVEMENTS
BUT THERE ARE SOME SECURITY
MEASURES THAT NEED TO BE MADE.
WE'RE ASKING FOR FOUR HUNDRED
TWENTY THOUSAND FOR THAT AND
THE TREE LINE IS AT A POINT
WHERE THEY'RE READY FOR
SCHEMATIC DESIGN.
IT'S AN APPROPRIATE PROJECT FOR
FEDERAL FUNDING.
WE'VE BEEN GIVEN FEEDBACK THAT
IT MIGHT BE FAVORABLY REVIEWED
SO WE SUBMITTED IT LAST YEAR
WHEN I WAS STANDING HERE I TALK
TO YOU ABOUT STUDIES.
WE ADMIT STUDIES ARE NOT
EXCITING.
NO ONE REALLY GETS EXCITED
ABOUT SPENDING SIX FIGURES AND
SOMETIMES MORE TO PERFORM A
STUDY.
BUT THE REALITY IS WE CANNOT
MANAGE A CITY IN A STRATEGIC
MANNER SIMPLY RELYING SOLELY
UPON THE PROFESSIONAL INTUITION
OF THE PEOPLE THAT SHOW UP
EVERY DAY.
SOME OF THESE STUDIES HAVE NOT
BEEN PERFORMED IN MORE THAN A
DECADE.
THEY ARE NOT ALL FROM THE
GENERAL FUND AND THEY WILL BE
PERFORMED IN SOME CASES ACROSS
TWO YEARS.
SO NORTH MAIN STREET WASTE
CHARACTERIZATION, RAW WATER
MAIN ALIGNMENT OUR SAMPLES
WATER SUPPLY, COST OF SERVICE,
SANITARY SEWER COST OF SERVICE
EACH OF THOSE ARE TWO HUNDRED
THIRTY THOUSAND DOLLARS EACH
YOU WILL RECALL AS I STOOD HERE
LAST YEAR I TALKED TO YOU ABOUT
THE GRAVEL ROAD STUDY.
WE HAVE A NUMBER OF AREAS IN
THE CITY THAT ARE GRAVEL ROADS
AND THEY TEND TO FLOOD.
WE ARE TRYING TO DETERMINE ONE
THE CAUSE AND TO SOLUTIONS FOR
ADDRESSING THOSE ISSUES.
SO WE'VE INSERTED AN ADDITIONAL
TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY TO
CONTINUE WITH THAT WORK.
ALL TOLD, WE'RE INVESTING TWO
MILLION PLUS IN STUDIES
NECESSARY.
WE'RE INVESTING EIGHT PLUS
MILLION DOLLARS IN FLEET.
IN FACT IN SOME OF OUR SERVICE
AREAS WE HAVE TO GO BACK TO THE
THEM TO GET ADDITIONAL FUNDING
IN ORDER TO MEET THE FLEET COST
.
SO NOT ONLY ARE COSTS GOING UP,
YOU'VE GOT TO TEAR UP ISSUE IF
IT'S NOT THE TARIFF ISSUE ON
THE WHOLE IT'S THE PARTS THAT
GO
INTO THE VEHICLES IF THEY'RE
MADE UNDER THE AUSPICES
OF FEDERAL COVERAGE OF THE
TARIFFS THEN THEY'RE GOING TO
COST MORE.
WE ALSO ARE DEALING WITH A
SITUATION WHERE IT'S TAKING US
LONGER AND LONGER TO GET THE
ITEMS THAT WE ORDERED.
>> YOU WILL RECALL THERE WAS A
FIRE ENGINE THAT CAME PAST TO
MAYBE TWO MONTHS AGO.
WE KNOW WE WON'T SEE IT FOR
FOUR YEARS BUT WE HAVE TO SPEND
THE MONEY NOW ELECTRIC VEHICLES
ARE CONTINUING TO ESCALATE AS
WELL.
SO WE'RE GOING TO DO THE BEST
THAT WE CAN WITH THE FLEET.
BUT THE FLEET IS A SIGNIFICANT
INVESTMENT AND ONE THAT WE MUST
CONTINUE TO MAKE.
THE KEY POINT ABOUT THE EIGHT
PLUS MILLION IT AFFECTS
MULTIPLE PHONES.
IT'S ALL GENERAL FUND.
THEN THERE'S THE ISSUE OF THE
THROWN LAST YEAR WE TALKED
ABOUT IT AS A PILOT.
>> WE NEEDED A PUBLIC RESTROOM
FACILITY IN DOWNTOWN.
WE HAD A NUMBER OF ISSUES THAT
PEOPLE WERE COMPLAINING ABOUT.
WE WERE DETERMINED TO FIND A
MODEL THAT WAS ADA ACCESSIBLE.
>> THIS IS THAT MODEL.
WHAT MAKES IT SO EXPENSIVE IS A
COMPANY THAT WE GET IT FROM IS
BASED ON THE EAST COAST.
WE ARE PROBABLY THE FURTHEST
WESTERN CLIENT BECAUSE OF THAT
.
THEY REQUIRE THAT YOU TAKE A
MINIMUM NUMBER OF UNITS.
IT'S NOT COST EFFECTIVE FOR
THEM TO JUST SEND US ONE OR TWO
.
SO WE HAVE NEGOTIATED THE TEN
DOWN TO AN EIGHT BUT IT'S STILL
EXPENSIVE.
THIS REPRESENTS A PARTNERSHIP
WITH THE DENHA AND IT'S
PROBABLY ONE OF THE AREAS
OF THE BUDGET THAT WE STRUGGLED
WITH THE MOST.
SO I DID IN TERMS OF SAYING YES
IT STAYS OR NO IT GOES.
>> THE FINAL CONCLUSION IS THAT
WHEN YOU LOOK AT THE WORD
DOWNTOWN IS WHEN YOU THINK
ABOUT WHERE WE WANT DOWNTOWN TO
GO, WE WANT IT TO BE MORE
DENSIFIED.
WE WANT MORE RESIDENTS.
>> WE WANT MORE PEOPLE TO COME
AND ENJOY IT.
YOU CAN'T AFFORD NOT TO DO AND
SO IT'S IN
THE RIGHT SIDE
OF THE SLIDE SHOWS THE FUTURE
STATE DCU.
THIS IS WHERE WE'RE GOING.
>> WE'RE GOING TO TRY TO GET
HOUSEHOLDS CONNECT IT TO THE
SIU BUT BEFORE WE CAN DO THAT
WE'VE GOT TO TAKE SOME MEASURES
TO ACTUALLY STAY IN THE MODEL
UP THAT REPRESENTS THE LEFT
SIDE OF THE SLIDE AT THE
PRESENT THE CITY OF ANN ARBOR
HAS OR THE SC YOU IF YOU WERE
THINKING OF IT AS A LEGAL
ENTITY ATTORNEY POWER IT HAS NO
ASSETS, IT HAS NO MONEY, IT HAS
NO BANK ACCOUNT.
EVERYTHING THAT HAPPENS RIGHT
NOW IS BORN FROM A MILLAGE.
SO WE ARE TAKING STEPS TO HIRE
AN EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR.
THIS ENTITY WILL BE YOU SHOULD
THINK OF IT AS BEING IN AN
INCUBATOR FOR X PERIOD OF TIME.
THE BACK OFFICE WILL BE
PERFORMED BY CITY SERVICE AREAS
THE DAY TO DAY OPERATIONAL
SUPPORT WILL COME FROM ODISSI
AT SOME POINT.
I WON'T SAY HOW LIKELY IT IS
BUT AT SOME POINT IT'S AT LEAST
POSSIBLE THAT THE SEIU WOULD
SPIN OUT FROM CITY GOVERNMENT
PROPER AND STAND ON ITS OWN.
BUT WE ARE SOME YEARS AWAY FROM
THAT BEING POSSIBLE AND SO
UNTIL THAT TIME IT NEEDS TO
FUNCTION IN THE MANNER THAT WE
ARE LAYING OUT HERE AND WE
PIVOT TO COMMUNITY SAFETY.
AT FIRST BLUSH IT'D BE EASY TO
THINK ABOUT.
HE'S TALKING ABOUT PUBLIC
SAFETY POLICE AND FIRE IN THIS
INSTANCE I AM NOT COMMUNITY
SAFETY IS BROADER THAN JUST
THAT.
WE START WITH WINTER OPERATIONS
.
LAST YEAR WHEN I STOOD BEFORE
YOU WE WERE PRESENTING YOU A
DIFFERENT PLAN, A NEW PLAN FOR
WINTER OPS.
WE WERE PRESENTING THAT PLAN
BECAUSE THE PUBLIC TOLD US IN
NO UNCERTAIN TERMS THEY WERE
NOT SATISFIED WITH THE STANDARD
OF SERVICE THAT WE WERE GIVING
IN ORDER TO GIVE A DIFFERENT
STANDARD WE NEEDED A DIFFERENT
PLAN.
THE PLAN CALLED FOR CITY
GOVERNMENT TO DO A NUMBER
OF THINGS BUT IT ALSO CALLED
FOR THE PUBLIC DO SOME THINGS
AND WE SAID WE WERE GOING TO
RAMP UP OVER A THREE YEAR
PERIOD BEFORE WE STARTED
ENFORCING WHAT WE'RE ASKING THE
PUBLIC TO DO TO DATE MEANING
TODAY WE SPEND TWO POINT FOUR
MILLION DOLLARS FOR THIS WINTER
SEASON.
YOU SEE THE ELEMENTS THAT
SPREAD ACROSS ON THE SLIDE A
DIGITAL FLEET, ADDITIONAL
EQUIPMENT WE WANTED TO GET TO
LOCAL ROADS FASTER.
WE'VE BEEN ABLE TO DO THAT.
WE NEEDED TO DEAL WITH DOWNTOWN
BETTER.
WE'VE ADDED A THIRD PARTY THAT
ENABLES US TO DO THAT SIDEWALKS
,CURB RAMPS ETC. CETERA.
WE ARE GETTING VERY POSITIVE
FEEDBACK FROM THE PUBLIC ON THE
NEW PLAN.
WE'RE GETTING VERY POSITIVE
FEEDBACK FROM THE PUBLIC ON OUR
EXECUTION OF THE PLAN.
BUT HERE'S A THOUGHT WE REALLY
HAVE NOT HAD THAT MANY SERIOUS
SNOW INCIDENTS THIS WINTER AND
IT'S STILL TWO POINT FOUR
MILLION SO IF WE EVER HAD AN
OUTRAGEOUS WINTER THAT NUMBER
WOULD BE EXTRAORDINARILY HIGHER
.
>> WINTER OPERATIONS IS NOT
SOMETHING WHERE YOU CAN BUDGET
A HARD NUMBER AND SAY THAT
YOU'RE NOT GOING TO SURPASS YOU
HAVE TO RESPOND WHATEVER THE
ANSWER THAT'S HAPPEN.
>> AND SO I'M SHOWING YOU WHAT
WE SPENT.
>> THERE'S A RUMOR SPRING'S
ALMOST HERE SO MAYBE WE'RE
ABOUT DONE WHERE IT'S GOING TO
GO THE NEXT FISCAL YEAR.
>> WE DON'T KNOW COMMUNITY
SAFETY ALSO TALKS ABOUT
ENABLING OUR RESIDENTS TO BE
ABLE TO MOVE ABOUT.
WE TEND TO BUNDLE THINGS UNDER
A SINGLE LABEL WHEN WE'RE
REALLY TALKING ABOUT MULTIPLE
ITEMS WE TEND TO LUMP
EVERYTHING UNDER A ROAD PROJECT
.
WE DO IT SO THAT WE CAN WORK IN
A MORE COORDINATED MANNER.
WE BUILD OUT LARGE ROAD
PROJECTS BUT THE ROAD PROJECT
ENABLES US TO ALSO ADDRESS CITY
POLICY THAT YOU HAVE SET
ANOTHER REASON THAT WE DO IT
THE WAY WE DO IT IS BECAUSE
ESSENTIALLY THE MONEY'S ALL
COMING OUT OF THE SAME BUCKET
NIXON ROAD WHICH IS HOW WE TERM
IT.
NIXON ROAD RECONSTRUCTION ALSO
INCLUDES CROSSWALKS, ALSO
INCLUDES BIKE LANES, ALSO
INCLUDES SPEED MANAGEMENT.
LAST YEAR IN YOUR COUNCIL
COMMENT REGARDING THE BUDGET
YOU ALL EXPRESSED A DESIRE TO
SEE MORE CROSSWALKS HAPPEN IN
ANN ARBOR.
I'M SHOWING YOU THE SLIDE IN
THE MANNER IN WHICH WE'RE
PRESENTING IT TO SHOW THAT WE
DID HEAR YOU AND THERE ARE
CROSSWALKS CONTAINED IN A
NUMBER OF THE PROJECT BUT IN
OUR VERNACULAR WE SAY IT'S A
ROAD PROJECT BUT WE COULD SAY
IT'S A MULTIFACETED PROJECT.
MILLIONS OF DOLLARS WILL AGAIN
BE SPENT IN THE UPCOMING FISCAL
YEAR AND WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
HOW CAN WE CATEGORIZE WHAT
WE'RE DOING A LITTLE
DIFFERENTLY TO MAKE IT EASIER
TO IDENTIFY WHERE THE CROSSWALK
PROJECTS ARE WITH A BIKE LANE
PROJECTS.
>> SO WE'RE A WORK IN PROGRESS
ON THAT.
BUT AS YOU CAN SEE, A LOT IS
GETTING DONE.
WE'VE HAD MULTIPLE CALLS FOR
MORE ENFORCEMENT PARKS DOWNTOWN
PARKING BIKE LANES AT
DELIVERY'S.
WE SIMPLY DO NOT HAVE ENOUGH
COMMUNITY STANDARDS.
STAFF HAVE TO BE ALL THE PLACES
THAT WERE BEING ASKED TO BE SO
IN THIS BUDGET WE PLAN TO ADD
ONE COMMUNITY STANDARDS OFFICER
.
YOU WILL RECALL THESE PEOPLE
ARE NOT SWORN BUT THEY ARE
THERE TO EXECUTE OR IMPLEMENT
THE STANDARDS THAT WE HAVE FOR
ALL OF THOSE AREAS THIS IS THE
FIRST EXAMPLE OF A CONTINGENCY
INSERT IF THE STATE ACTS AND IF
THEY ACT IN A MANNER THAT
ALLOWS US TO WE WOULD PROPOSE
TO ADD A SECOND OFFICER TO WORK
IN THE ENFORCEMENT AREA AGAIN
WE WON'T KNOW UNTIL THE STATE
MOVES.
ONE OF THE THINGS I'VE TALKED
ABOUT WITH MISS SHONN IS
PERHAPS WE WILL BE IN A
SITUATION WHERE WE NEED TO DO A
MIDYEAR ADJUSTMENT.
HISTORICALLY ANN ARBOR HAS NOT
DONE THAT MUCH.
OTHER CITIES DO IT ALL THE
TIME.
IT'S WHERE THE ADMINISTRATION
WOULD COME TO YOU EXACTLY IN
THE MIDDLE OF THE FISCAL YEAR
AND SAY BASED
ON NEW
INFORMATION WE WANT TO MAKE
AMENDMENTS TO THE BUDGET IN THE
FOLLOWING WAY SO WE'LL SEE IF
THAT PANS OUT CATCHING UP WITH
DEMAND.
WE'RE A LEAN ORGANIZATION.
WE'RE GOING TO BE A LEAN
ORGANIZATION.
WE'LL NEVER BE AN ORGANIZATION
OF SEVERAL THOUSAND PEOPLE AND
SO WE TRY TO FIND WAYS TO MEET
THE DEMANDS THAT WE GET.
BUT AT A CERTAIN POINT THE ONLY
WAY FOR THE PERFORMANCE TO GET
BETTER IS TO ADD MORE PEOPLE TO
IT.
WE START WITH THE HOUSING
COMMISSION.
KEEP IN MIND THEY'RE HIGHER
COME FROM THEIR MILLAGE BUT
THEIR CITY EMPLOYEES SO THEY GO
THROUGH OUR SYSTEM THE HOUSING
COMMISSION IS ADDING MORE
PROPERTIES THEREFORE THEY NEED
MORE PEOPLE.
THESE ARE THE POSITIONS THAT
MISS HALL BELIEVES THAT THEY
NEED.
>> SO WE WILL PUT THEM THROUGH
THE H.R. PROCESS AND BRING THEM
ON BOARD WHEN APPROPRIATE.
THE ADMINISTRATION ALSO NEEDS
TO ADD SOME PEOPLE A ZONING
COORDINATOR MOVING FROM HALF
TIME TO THREE QUARTER TIME
PARKS NEEDS A COUPLE OF PEOPLE.
ONE IS A COORDINATE, ONE IS A
PLANNING COORDINATOR.
WHAT ARE UTILITY SOLID WASTE
TWO POINTS HERE.
THESE ARE NOT ALL COMING FROM
GENERAL FUND AND THERE ARE TWO
I WON'T SAY MORE IMPORTANT THAN
THE REST BUT WE HAVE TWO POINTS
OF FAILURE FAILURE THAT WE NEED
TO ERASE FIRST ONE IS PAYROLL.
>> WE HAVE EIGHT HUNDRED AND
FIFTY EMPLOYEES AND ESSENTIALLY
WE'VE BEEN RELYING ON A SINGLE
INDIVIDUAL TO DO PAYROLL THAT
IS TO THEN IF ANYTHING HAPPENS
WE WOULD BE STRUGGLING TO GET
PAYROLL OUT.
SO WE'VE ADDED AN AMOUNT
OF MONEY TO HAVE A PARTY
STANDING BY JUST IN CASE WE
NEED THEM TO HELP WITH PAYROLL
.
THE SECOND POINT OF FAILURE
THAT WE WANT TO IMPROVE UPON IS
THE SULLOWAY SUPERVISOR IF YOU
THINK ABOUT THE THINGS THAT
WE'VE BEEN PUSHING FORWARD FOR
MORE DENSITY, FOR MORE HOUSING,
FOR MORE OPTIONS FOR PEOPLE TO
LIVE IN THE CITY, ONE OF THE
BASIC FUNCTIONS THAT YOU HAVE
TO FIGURE OUT EVERY TIME YOU DO
A NEW DEVELOPMENT IS IS HOW
WILL THE SOLID WASTE FUNCTION
BE HANDLED?
WE DO NOT HAVE ENOUGH PEOPLE TO
DO IT ALL ON OUR OWN.
SO WE HAVE TO PUT TOGETHER A
STRATEGY FOR ADDRESSING THE NEW
ADD ON.
BUT WHAT WE'VE BEEN DOING TO
DATE IS HAVING A SINGLE SOLID
WASTE SUPERVISOR TRY TO MANAGE
THAT ENTIRE AREA.
>> IT'S JUST TOO MUCH.
>> SO WE NEED TO ADD A SECOND
SOLLOWAY SUPERVISOR SO THAT WE
CAN BETTER MANAGE THE FOLKS.
OUR SUPERVISORS ARE WORKING
PROFESSIONALS SO THEY'RE NOT
SITTING BEHIND A DESK ALL DAY
JUST DOING ADMINISTRATIVE
THINGS.
THOSE TWO WOULD MAKE A
SIGNIFICANT IMPROVEMENT IN HOW
WE DO BUSINESS AND NEXT WE
PIVOT TO STRENGTHEN THE
ORGANIZATION.
FOR ME THE FUNDAMENTAL QUESTION
HERE IS WHAT KIND
OF ORGANIZATION DO WE WANT TO
BE?
AND WHEN WE FOCUS ON THAT IT
GIVES US AT LEAST AN AVENUE
OF CONSIDERATION FOR BIG THINGS
AND SMALL STEPS THAT WE CAN
TAKE TO MAKE US A BETTER
.
PREVIOUSLY COUNCIL HAS GIVEN
SUPPORT TO THE ADMINISTRATION
TO ADDRESS PARKING INEQUITIES.
>> WE HAVE SOME OF THE LOWEST
PAID PEOPLE IN THE GOVERNMENT
THAT ARE PAYING THE MOST FOR
PARKING.
>> WE HAD FOLKS PAYING AS MUCH
AS ONE HUNDRED DOLLARS A MONTH
SO WHAT WE ALREADY DONE IS
EQUALIZE THAT WHERE EVERYBODY
THAT PARKS THE AND AND ASHLEY
GARAGE ARE NOW PAYING THIRTY.
IT DOESN'T SEEM LIKE A LOT BUT
THE EMPLOYEES REALLY
APPRECIATED THE MOVE THAT THEIR
EMPLOYER MADE TO RECOGNIZE
WHERE THEY ARE PREVIOUSLY YOU
HAVE SUPPORTED US INVESTING
MONEY IN A COMPENSATION STUDY.
WE STRUGGLE WITH BOTH
RECRUITMENT AND RETENTION.
WE'VE GOT PEOPLE THAT HAVE THAT
ARE LEAVING HERE BECAUSE
THEY'RE NOT BEING PAID
COMPETITIVELY AND WE HAVE
PEOPLE THAT ARE SAYING THEY
WILL NOT COME BECAUSE THE PAY
IS NOT COMPETITIVE.
IT'S NOT IN EVERY JOB, IT'S NOT
IN EVERY CLASS VACATION.
BUT IN ORDER FOR US TO BE A
MORE STABLE ORGANIZATION WE
NEED TO MAKE A MOVE HERE.
WE DO EXPECT TO GET THE
FINDINGS FROM THE COMPENSATION
STUDY WITHIN THE NEXT FEW WEEKS
AND THEN I WILL WAIT FOR OUR
COLLABORATION WITH THE OFFICE
OF ORGANIZATIONAL EQUITY TO
GIVE ME SOME KIND
OF RECOMMENDATION.
WE HAVE INSERTED MORE MONEY IN
THIS BUDGET TO ADDRESS THE
INITIAL FINDINGS.
CAN WE SOLVE IT ALL IN A SINGLE
FISCAL YEAR?
PROBABLY.
BUT IF WE DON'T START WE WON'T
DO ANYTHING AND THAT BRINGS ME
TO THE OVERCOMING THE
CREDIBILITY ISSUE.
WHAT I HAVE BEEN TOLD BY
EMPLOYEES IS THAT WE'VE BEEN
HERE BEFORE WE DID A STUDY BUT
THEN NOTHING HAPPENED.
MY PLEDGE TO THEM IS THAT IF WE
DO THE COMP STUDY THIS TIME I
WILL STAND BEHIND MAKING SURE
THAT WE TAKE SOME ACTION TO
ADDRESS IT.
BUT WE CAN'T DO THAT IF WE
DON'T HAVE ANY DATA AND THE
DATA ONLY COMES FROM DOING THE
COMP STUDY AND SO THAT'S WHERE
WE ARE.
WHERE IS THE MARKET?
>> THE STUDY WILL TELL US THAT
WHERE ARE WE?
>> IT'LL TELL US THAT TO WHERE
SHOULD WE BE IS UP FOR DEBATE
WHERE WE KNOW WE WILL NEVER BE
IS THE MARKET LEADER.
MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENTS ARE NOT
MARKET IT COMES TO
EMPLOYMENT.
THAT'S PRIVATE SECTOR.
>> WE'RE NOT TRYING TO BE THAT
BUT WE NEED TO OUR
SETTLING POINTS SOMEWHERE THAT
MAKES US AN ATTRACTIVE CHOICE
AND POTENTIAL EMPLOYEES AND
CURRENT EMPLOYEES HAVE CHOICE
FOR THE SMALL INVESTMENT
OF TWENTY FIVE THOUSAND.
WE'RE GOING TO CREATE SPACES
WITHIN OUR CITY FACILITIES THAT
WILL ACCOMMODATE PEOPLE THAT
NEED EXPRESSING RUBE'S.
WE'RE ALSO GOING TO ALLOW THAT
SPACE TO BE AVAILABLE FOR
PEOPLE THAT NEED TO GO AND
DECOMPRESS.
COVID HAS TAUGHT US NOTHING.
IT'S THAT MENTAL HEALTH MATTERS
AND IN ORDER FOR US TO
ACKNOWLEDGE THAT IT MATTERS WE
NEED TO CREATE OPPORTUNITIES
WHERE WE ARE SIGNALING TO THE
WORKFORCE THAT WE SEE THEM AS
WHOLE PEOPLE NOT JUST EIGHT TO
FIVE PROFESSIONALS HOLD PEOPLE
MEANING SOME HAVE CHILD CARE
ISSUES, SOME HAVE AGING PARENT
ISSUES.
SOME HAVE PHYSICAL ISSUES AND
SOMETIMES THEY JUST NEED A
BREAK.
SO IT'S THE BEST TWENTY FIVE
THOUSAND WE WILL SPEND STILL
STRENGTHENING THE ORGANIZATION
WE ALREADY KNEW FIRESTATION FOR
.
>> I'M SURE DR. STULTS IS
ECSTATIC THAT IT'LL HAVE SOLAR
ECSTATIC THAT IT'LL HAVE
GEOTHERMAL.
WE ARE ALL ECSTATIC ABOUT THAT
BUT WE'RE ALSO A LITTLE MORE
ECSTATIC ABOUT THE FACT THAT
AFTER 40 SOME YEARS WE'RE
FINALLY GOING TO HAVE A FIRE
STATION THAT IS GENDER
INCLUSIVE.
THIS IS MINDY CURRE.
THIS IS THE FIRST WOMAN THAT
STEPPED FORWARD TO TAKE THE
OATH IS A ANN ARBOR
FIREFIGHTER.
SHE STARTED IN NINETEEN FOR A
DECADE.
>> SHE WAS THE ONLY WOMAN HERE
.
SHE SERVED THE COMMUNITY IN A
MANNER WHERE HER EMPLOYER WAS
AT A SITUATION WHERE OUR
PHILOSOPHY AND OUR OPERATIONS
DID NOT MATCH.
BUT SHE STILL KEPT COMING.
>> SHE RETIRED IN 2005.
>> TO DATE WE HAVE HAD A TOTAL
OF TWENTY TWO WOMEN STEP
FORWARD TO SERVE THE ANN ARBOR
FIRE DEPARTMENT.
>> WE BELIEVE SINCE MINDY KERR
IS STILL ALIVE AND STILL IN THE
AREA THAT FIRE STATION NUMBER
FOUR SHOULD BE NAMED FOR HER
BECAUSE YOU CANNOT THRIVE
WITHOUT RECOGNIZING THAT YOU'RE
STANDING ON THE SHOULDERS OF A
PIONEER AND IN OUR VIEW IT'S AN
APPROPRIATE THING FOR US TO DO
.
HERE ARE SOME AREAS THAT WE
MUST SOLVE AND WHILE THEY ARE
NOT IN THE BUDGET IN TERMS OF A
LINE ITEM, THESE ARE THINGS
THAT MUST BE ADDRESSED DURING
THE FISCAL YEAR AND THE REASON
THAT WE CHOSE A RUBIK'S CUBE IS
BECAUSE EVEN THOUGH IT'S HARD,
IT'S SOLVABLE.
>> WE START WITH THE HUMAN
RESOURCES PERFORMANCE
MANAGEMENT POLICE RECORDS
MANAGEMENT OR OREMUS AND THEN
UNARM RESPONSE.
>> I'M GOING TO TALK ABOUT ALL
THREE OF THOSE WE NEED TO
DETERMINE AS AN ORGANIZATION
EXACTLY.
NOT CONCEPTUALLY, NOT
GENERICALLY BUT EXACTA WHERE
WE'RE GOING IN TERMS OF A
PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM,
WHAT IS THE EXACT PRODUCT?
WHAT IS THE UPFRONT COST AND
WHAT IS THE ONGOING COST?
>> OUR NEW HRR DIRECTOR AND I
HAVE HAD THIS CONVERSATION
MULTIPLE TIMES.
I DO HAVE CONFIDENCE THAT OUR
AUDIT IS GOING TO BE ABLE TO
ANSWER THE QUESTIONS THAT ARE
ON THE SCREEN AND WHEN THEY CAN
.
PRESCOTT AND I ARE GOING TO
DEVELOP A STRATEGY TO ADDRESS
BRINGING THE PERFORMANCE
MANAGEMENT SYSTEM INTO THE
GOVERNMENT.
IT WILL ONLY HELP US WHAT IT IS
I DON'T KNOW BUT WE NEED TO GET
IT DONE POLICING OR TO SAY THE
POLICE DEPARTMENT I WANT TO
TAKE A MINUTE AS I SOMETIMES
WILL DO AND BE REAL WITH THE
COMMUNITY WHEN I TALK ABOUT
THIS YOU COULD NEVER MAKE AN
ARGUMENT THAT THE POLICING
INDUSTRY OR THE POLICE
DEPARTMENT IS VIEWED THE SAME
AS ALL OTHER SERVICE AREAS.
IT'S SIMPLY NOT POLICING ALL
SEEMS TO FALL INTO MORE OF A
GENERIC INDUSTRY WIDE
DISCUSSION AND FOR GOOD REASON
.
THERE ARE IMPROVEMENTS THAT
POLICING NEEDS TO SEE AND NEEDS
TO MAKE HAPPEN IN OUR CASE THAT
INCLUDES A NEW RECORDS
MANAGEMENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM.
SAME QUESTIONS FOR ARE THAT I'M
ASKING CHIEF ANDERSON WHAT IS
THE PRODUCT?
WHAT'S THE UPFRONT COST AND
WHAT IS THE ONGOING COST?
OUR CURRENT STATE IS THIS WE
ARE ONE OF MANY USERS
OF KLIMT'S.
IT'S A SYSTEM WE DO NOT OWN IS
A SYSTEM WE DO NOT CONTROL AND
IT CANNOT MEET THE NEEDS OF A
DEPARTMENT THAT IS WORKING TO
BUILD MORE TRUST IN THE
COMMUNITY.
IT CANNOT CUSTOMIZER OUR PORTS.
WE ARE LIMITED ON THE DATA THAT
WE CAN COLLECT AND SOMEONE
MIGHT SAY WELL IS THAT A BIG
DEAL?
IT'S A BIG DEAL IF YOU'RE
TRYING TO BUILD TRUST IN THE
COMMUNITY SAYS TO YOU I'M
ASKING YOU FOR CERTAIN KINDS
OF DATA AND YOU SAY YOU CAN'T
GIVE IT.
I'M ASKING YOU FOR A CERTAIN
KIND OF REPORT AND YOU CAN'T
PRODUCE I'M ASKING YOU TO BE
MORE TRANSPARENT SO I'LL BE IN
A STRONGER POSITION TO TRUST
YOU AND WE'RE SAYING WE JUST
CAN'T WHO BELIEVES THAT WE HAVE
THOUSANDS OF PIECES OF EVIDENCE
DATING BACK TO DECADES ON
MICROFICHE IF YOU GOT A
TEENAGER ASKING WHAT MICROFICHE
IS AND SEE WHAT ANSWER THEY
GIVE YOU, WE HAVE BEEN PLACING
AN UNDUE BURDEN ON SINGLE
INDIVIDUALS.
WE NEED SOMEONE WITH SUPER
POWERS TO GO IN AND TRY TO FIND
THE INFORMATION, TRY TO FIND A
WAY TO GET IT OUT.
IT'S SIMPLY NOT GOOD ENOUGH.
HERE'S WHAT WE NEED TO BE IN A
PLACE WHERE WE CAN CUSTOMIZE
THIS REPORT TEMPLATES WHAT WE
CAN STREAMLINE FUNCTIONS WELL
WE CAN BETTER BETTER MANAGE
PROPERTY RECORDS WHERE WE'RE IN
A BETTER POSITION TO BUILD
TRUST.
HERE'S THE ISSUE I'M JUST
COMING STRAIGHT ON IS NOT
INEXPENSIVE AND I KNOW IT IS
SENSITIVE ACROSS AMERICA WHEN
WE TALK ABOUT SPENDING MONEY ON
POLICING.
BUT AS YOUR CITY ADMINISTRATOR
I'M SAYING WE CANNOT STAY IN
THE PLACE THAT WE'RE IN.
WE HAVE TO GET BETTER AND
THAT'S WHY I'M PRESENTING IT
WHEN WE GET THE THREE QUESTIONS
ANSWERED AND WE FIGURE OUT A
STRATEGY FOR HOW WE COULD DO IT
,I WILL COME BACK TO YOU AND
THEN THERE'S UNARM RESPONSE.
THIS BUDGET CONTINUES OUR
PRACTICE OF TAKING 250000
DOLLARS FROM THE MARIJUANA
EXCISE TAX MONEY AND SETTING IT
SIDE.
SO THAT IS THE EASY PART.
THE ADMINISTRATION HAS THE SAME
GOAL THAT IT'S HAD WE NEED TO
DO IT RIGHT VERSUS DOING IT
FAST.
THE CITIES THAT YOU SEE ON THE
SCREEN ARE CITIES THAT WE HAVE
ENGAGED WITH AND WE HAVE GONE
TO THOSE CITIES HAD BEEN ON THE
GROUND WITH THEIR PROGRAMS
ALBUQUERQUE, ATLANTA, DENVER
AND DURHAM VERY DIFFERENT
CITIES, VERY DIFFERENT PROGRAMS
.
WE COULDN'T GO EXACTLY WHEN WE
WANTED TO BECAUSE THOSE CITIES
GET INUNDATED WITH REQUESTS.
SO THERE'S ONLY CERTAIN TIMES
WHEN THEY ALLOW VISITORS TO
COME.
SO YOU HAVE TO WAIT UNTIL THE
OPPORTUNITY PRESENTS ITSELF.
>> HERE'S SOME OF THE LESSONS
THAT WE'VE GOTTEN FROM THE
PLACES THAT WE TRAVELED.
THEY ALL SAY YOU'RE DOING THE
RIGHT THING BY GOING TO CITIES
BECAUSE YOU ACTUALLY NEED TO BE
ON THE GROUND WITH THEM VERSUS
SIMPLY RELYING ON EXCHANGING
EMAILS, PHONE CALLS OR READING
ARTICLES.
YOU NEED TO SEE HOW THE
PROGRAMS WORK.
>> THEY ALL HAVE A VERY NARROW
RANGE OF SITUATIONS THAT THEY
RESPOND TO.
>> NONE OF THEM ARE TWENTY FOUR
SEVEN MANY OF THEM SAY THEY
ACCEPT TWENTY FOUR SEVEN IT'S
NOT ATTAINABLE.
THEY ALL SAY STARTING WITH A
PILOT IS THE BEST WAY TO MOVE
FORWARD.
YOU MUST HAVE A SYSTEM TO TRACK
ALL DATA.
WHEN DID THE PERSON CALL HOW
LONG DID YOU TALK TO THEM?
HOW LONG DID IT TAKE FOR THE
DISPATCH TO HAPPEN ET CETERA?
AND IT'S VERY EXPENSIVE IN
ATLANTA AS AN EXAMPLE IT'S SIX
MILLION A YEAR CITY KICKS IN TO
THE NFL KICKS IN MONEY
FOUNDATIONS KICK IN MONEY AND
IN EVERY PLACE THAT WE'VE
LOOKED THE PERSON IN CHARGE IS
NOT A CLINICIAN.
THEY'RE THE ONE CHASING THE
DOLLARS THE COMMISSION IS
MANAGING THEIR RESPONSE TEAMS.
>> IT IS OUR INTENT TO PRESENT
OUR MODEL TO YOU THIS FALL AND
THEN WE'LL SEE WHAT IT TAKES TO
ACTUALLY GET IT STARTED.
BUT WE WOULD SAY THAT THE WAY
THAT WE'RE GOING ABOUT IT WHICH
HAS BEEN AFFIRMED BY OTHER
COMMUNITIES WHO HAVE BEEN IN
OUR PLACE IS THE RIGHT WAY TO
PROCEED AND THEN WE PIVOT TO
FACILITATING GROWTH.
CAN GROWTH OCCUR EQUALLY IN ALL
PARTS OF THIS CITY WE ARE
INVESTING FOUR HUNDRED AND
NINETY THOUSAND DOLLARS IN A
SANITARY SEWER COMP PLAN TO
DETERMINE THAT.
SIMPLY PUT, THE ANSWER'S NO BUT
WE NEED TO HAVE A CAPACITY
ANALYSIS PERFORMED THE STUDY
HAS ALREADY STARTED BUT WE WILL
STILL EXPEND MONEY IN NY TWENTY
SIX IN ORDER TO GET A COMPLETE
IT IT'LL TAKE THROUGH THE
BALANCE OF TWENTY TWENTY FIVE
TO GET THE WORK DONE AND THEN
THE WORK PRODUCT WILL ALLOW US
TO SHOW THE COMMUNITY AT LARGE
TO SHOW THE DEVELOPMENT
COMMUNITY IF YOU HAVE A GRAND
VISION FOR A QUARTER IN ANN
ARBOR HERE'S WHAT THE
INFRASTRUCTURE LOOKS LIKE.
HERE'S THE INVESTMENTS THAT
WOULD NEED TO BE MADE IN ORDER
FOR WHATEVER YOU'RE THINKING
ABOUT TO BE BUILT.
AND IN ADDITION TO THAT WE'RE
ALSO UNDERTAKING A DRINKING
WATER DISTRIBUTION PLAN BECAUSE
IF WE'RE GOING TO ADD THOUSANDS
OF PEOPLE TO THE CITY, WE HAVE
TO MAKE SURE THAT THE DRINKING
WATER SUPPLY IS SUFFICIENT.
WE GET OUR DRINKING WATER FROM
THE HURON RIVER.
WE HAVE WELLS BUT WHAT IT'S
REALLY SAYING THE CAPACITY
OF THE HURON RIVER IS NOT
ENDLESS FOR WHAT WE MIGHT NEED
THIS STUDY WILL GIVE US SOME
SPECIFICS ON WHERE THE CAPS ARE
.
YOU PASSED SEVERAL RESOLUTIONS
FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT.
ONE OF THEM CALLED FOR THE
CREATION OF THE NEW OFFICE
WHICH WE'VE DONE THE HIRING
OF THE NEW DIRECTOR WHICH WE'VE
DONE BUT ALSO IT CALLS FOR THE
DIRECTOR TO HIRE A CONSULTANT
TO LOOK AT ORDINANCES AND
PRACTICES TO SEE IF WE'RE AS UP
TO DATE AS POSSIBLE IN
FACILITATING GROWTH.
WE'VE INSERTED MONEY IN THE
BUDGET IN ORDER TO GET THAT
DONE AND
THEN COMES THE CLEAN
LOT THERE WAS INTERESTED IN
DOING AN RFP.
WE'VE DONE ONE.
CBRE IS OUR BROKER.
WE'RE WORKING WITH THEM EVERY
TWO WEEKS.
THE SALE DOCUMENTS HAS BEEN
LAUNCHED WITHIN THEIR SYSTEM
FOR BOTH CLIENT LOT AND FOR 15
WEST WASHINGTON TONIGHT I'M
FOCUSING SOLELY ON CLIENT
BECAUSE THERE'S A RELEVANCY TO
WHERE I'M GOING.
THE ADMINISTRATION WILL MAKE A
RECOMMENDATION TO YOU ON THE
PROCEEDS OF THE SALE WHEN WE
GET TO THAT POINT.
>> BUT WE'RE GOING TO PEEK
BEHIND THE CURTAIN TONIGHT IS
ONE THING THAT I CAN GUARANTEE
WILL BE IN THE RECOMMENDATION
LIST WE WANT TO TAKE THE FIRST
FIVE MILLION DOLLARS OFF THE
TOP OF THE SALE AND CREATE A
STRATEGIC ACQUISITION FUND.
WE HAVEN'T DONE THAT HERE.
WE WOULD ADD TO THE FUND OVER
TIME WE WOULD SEEK PARTNERS TO
PARTICIPATE WITH US.
I WOULD APPOINT A STRATEGIC
ACQUISITION FUND COMMITTEE
THAT'S LED BY OUR ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR AND COLET
BY OUR NEW DEPUTY ADMINISTRATOR
THAT WILL ALSO HAVE
PARTICIPATION BY OUR CFO, A
MEMBER OF THE ADC AND WITH KOWA
WILL ALLOW IT WILL BORROW ONE
OF HER ATTORNEYS.
WHY?
>> BECAUSE IF WE WANT TO TALK
ABOUT TAX BASE STABILITY WE
WANT TO TALK ABOUT HOUSING AND
PLACEMAKING LEVERAGING.
WE HAVE TO DO WHAT WE CAN AND
MAKE THAT HAPPEN AND ACQUIRING
PARCELS THAT WE CAN AFFORD TO
BUY ONLY MAKES BUSINESS SENSE
AND THIS IS THE DIRECTION THAT
WE BELIEVE WE NEED TO GO.
HERE IS THE SHEET THAT WE PUT
UP LAST ALL THE TIME MARIJUANA
EXCISE TAX.
>> SO A COUPLE OF THINGS WE'VE
LEARNED WE SEEM TO HAVE PEAKED
IN THE INTEREST IN BUYING
MARIJUANA FROM THE TWENTY THREE
OUTLETS THAT WE HAVE.
>> IT STAYS ESSENTIALLY FLAT
EVERY YEAR.
IT'S NOT A LOT OF MOVEMENT.
THE ONE TO THE COLUMN ON THE
LEFT THOSE THE PROJECTS THAT
WE'VE BEEN FUNDING SOME OF THE
PROJECTS ON THE LEFT LIKE
DEFLECTION COSTS MORE AND SO
WHEN WE ADDRESS THE RAISING
COST OF SOME OF THE ONES ON THE
LEFT, THAT MEANS THERE'S LESS
MONEY AVAILABLE FOR THE
DISCRETION OF COUNSEL.
>> WE'RE ONLY PROPOSING ONE NEW
ITEM NEW VISION ENGAGEMENT
CENTER WHICH PROVIDES
SUPERVISED CRISIS INTERVENTION.
THEY ARE A CASUALTY OF FEDERAL
POLICY.
I'LL JUST LEAVE THAT THERE.
WE'RE TRYING TO HELP THEM GET
STABLE.
THAT'S WHAT THE EIGHTY FOUR
THOUSAND REPRESENTS WHICH
LEAVES SIX HUNDRED AND SIXTEEN
THOUSAND AVAILABLE FOR YOUR
CONSIDERATION PERFORMING
THROUGH UNCERTAINTY DIFFICULT
BUT WE WILL IF YOU HAVE BUDGET
QUESTIONS AFTER TONIGHT WE WILL
BE HAPPY TO RECEIVE THEM.
YOU'LL SEND THEM TO FOUR PEOPLE
MISS HAGANS, MISS PACHON, MISS
BUSSEL, MEYER AND MYSELF
SPECIAL THANKS TO OUR CFO TO
MISS BOSSO MEYER ALSO SPECIAL
THANKS MISS HIGGINS BECAUSE
SHE'S THE ONE THAT DESIGNS ALL
OF THESE POWER POINTS THAT
YOU'RE LOOKING IN AND IT TAKES
A LOT OF TIME TO DO IT AND WE
REALLY APPRECIATE HER EFFORTS
ALSO.
THANKS TO THE EXECUTIVE TEAM
THAT IS SEATED BEHIND ME, I ASK
THEM TO BE HERE TONIGHT BECAUSE
WHAT I HAVE PRESENTED TO YOU AS
A CITY ADMINISTRATOR HAS
PROPOSED BUDGET IS THEIR
BUDGET.
IT REPRESENTS THEIR EMPLOYEE
AND THEIR WORK.
AND FINALLY, THANKS TO EVERY
PERSON THAT CHOOSES TO WORK
HERE BECAUSE WE ARE AN
ADMINISTRATION THAT GETS THINGS
DONE.
>> THANK YOU
.
THANK YOU, MR. HONEY.
FOR MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC, THE
PROCESS GOING FORWARD OF COURSE
IS THAT MR. DONEES BUDGET WILL
BE RELEASED TO COUNCIL ON THE
PUBLIC IN THE IN SHORT ORDER.
FOR ALL I KNOW IT MAY BE ONLINE
OUT THERE WILL BE A SERIES
OF PUBLIC HEARINGS ASSOCIATED
WITH THE BUDGET.
THOSE PUBLIC HEARINGS WILL
OCCUR AT OUR NEXT COUNCIL
MEETING MAY FIVE.
THE CITY COUNCIL WILL THEN
THEREAFTER AT OUR NEXT COUNCIL
MEETING THE SECOND MEETING IN
MAY HAVE AN OPPORTUNITY TO VOTE
ON THE ADMINISTRATORS BUDGET
AMENDMENTS PRESENTED.
THOSE AMENDMENTS WILL BE WILL
BE DECIDED AT THE TABLE
THEREAFTER THE BUDGET WILL BE
EITHER AMENDED OR ACCEPTED AS
IS IN ANY EVENT AN ACCEPTED
BUDGET WILL THEN MOVE FORWARD
AS OUR FISCAL YEAR TWENTY SIX
BUDGET IN THE UNLIKELY EVENT
JUST FOR THE COMMUNITY'S
INFORMATION AND IF THERE WERE
EVER AN ADMINISTRATOR BUDGET
THAT WE'RE WE'RE NOT ACCEPTED
WELL IT WOULD BECOME THE BUDGET
WE WOULD NEED TO BE AMENDED.
>> YES.
IF COUNCIL IS UNABLE TO AMEND
THE BUDGET, THE CITY
ADMINISTRATOR'S BUDGET BECOMES
THE BUDGET.
WE NOW COME TO A PUBLIC HEARING
PART OF ME PUBLIC COMMENT,
GENERAL TIME, PUBLIC COMMENT,
RESERVE TIME PUBLIC RESERVE
TIME IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC TO SPEAK
TO COUNCIL AND THE COMMUNITY
ABOUT MATTERS OF MUNICIPAL
INTEREST.
TO SPEAK OF PUBLIC COMMENT
RESERVE TIME ONE NEEDS TO HAVE
SIGNED UP IN ADVANCE BY
CONTACTING OUR CITY CLERK
SPEAKERS IN ALL INSTANCES WILL
HAVE THREE MINUTES IN WHICH TO
SPEAK.
>> SO PLEASE PAY CLOSE
ATTENTION TO THE TIME OUR CLERK
ALL THE TIME CLOCK WILL NOTIFY
YOU IN THIRTY SECONDS REMAINING
AND WHEN YOUR TIME IS EXPIRED
WHEN YOUR TIME'S EXPIRED PLEASE
CONCLUDE YOUR REMARKS AND CEDE
THE FLOOR.
OUR FIRST SPEAKER TODAY IS DAN
KELLY
.
>> ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU FOR THE OPPORTUNITY
TO SPEAK TODAY.
THANK YOU CITY ADMINISTRATOR
FOR THAT VERY THOUGHTFUL BUDGET
.
I WAS GOING TO SPEAK TO THAT
BRIEFLY.
MY NAME IS DAN KELLY.
I'M THE DIRECTOR OF THE SHELTER
ASSOCIATION OF WASHTENAW
COUNTY, ALSO KNOWN LOCALLY AS
THE DELANA CENTER WHERE WE
SERVE ALMOST FIFTEEN HUNDRED
EACH YEAR IN OUR LOCAL
COMMUNITY DURING OVER THIS LAST
YEAR WE'RE JUST COMING OUT
OF WINTER SEASON.
WE MENTIONED MAYBE BRING
HAPPENING KIND OF OUR WINTER
SEASON JUST ENDED.
WE SAW RECORD NUMBERS THIS
WINTER WE SERVE UP TO TWO
HUNDRED AND FIFTEEN PEOPLE WANT
TO GIVE A NIGHT THAT'S ACTUALLY
OUR THIRD YEAR IN A ROW FACING
RECORD NEED SERVED OVER EIGHT
HUNDRED PEOPLE ACROSS OUR
COUNTY, MANY OF THEM LOCAL
RESIDENTS AS WELL.
SO I WANTED TO SHARE THAT.
I WANT TO SAY A BIG THANK YOU
TO THE COUNCIL MAYOR CITY
ADMINISTRATOR AND THE ENTIRE
CITY STAFF FOR SUPPORTING A
VARIETY OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING
INITIATIVES OVER THE LAST YEAR
AND ALSO AS MENTIONED IN THE
BUDGET, A LOT OF SUPPORT FOR
CRITICAL BASIC NEEDS SERVICES
LIKE THE SHELTER ASSOCIATION,
THE DEFLECTIONS PROGRAM THAT
I'LL SPEAK TO NOW RISING HOPE
FOR HOUSING.
SO THESE INVESTMENTS ARE
INCREDIBLY NEEDED AS WE'RE
SEEING RISING COSTS AND
INCREASING HOMELESSNESS ACROSS
OUR COMMUNITY.
SO THE RISING HOPE FOR HOUSING
PROGRAM I WANT TO SPEAK TO
SPECIFICALLY WE AS A MEMBER
OF THAT COLLECTIVE REALLY,
REALLY RECOMMEND FUNDING THAT
FOR THE THIRD YEAR IN A ROW AND
CONSIDERING THAT THAT PROGRAM
HELPS US CONTINUE EQUITY WORK
ACROSS THE COMMUNITY CENTERING
JUSTICE, IMPACT PERSONS AND
FAMILIES WITH SUPPORT THROUGH
HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHER PROGRAMS
HELPING THEM NOT ONLY GET INTO
HOUSING BUT MAINTAIN THAT
HOUSING WHICH IS SO IMPORTANT
RIGHT NOW ON THE FIRST YEAR
OF THE PROGRAM SERVED ONE
HUNDRED AND TWENTY EIGHT
WASHINGTON COUNTY HOUSEHOLDS
HELPING THEM AVOID EVICTION AND
IMPROVED HOUSING STABILITY,
IMPROVING HOUSING STABILITY AND
SELF-SUFFICIENCY THROUGH SUCH
SERVICES AS TRAUMA INFORMED
CASE MANAGEMENT, PEER SUPPORT
MENTORSHIP MOVE AND COST
ASSISTANCE SECURITY DEPOSIT
LOTS OF OTHER LOTS OF OTHER
FLEXIBLE FUNDING ASSISTANCE AND
WE EXPECT A SIMILAR NUMBER IN
THE SECOND YEAR OF THE PROGRAM
.
AS I MENTIONED BECAUSE OF THE
INCREASING NEED I COULD SPEAK
PERSONALLY THAT FLEXIBLE
ASSISTANCE REALLY HELPS US WITH
UNIQUE SITUATIONS WE ENCOUNTER
SO MANY OF THE GUESTS IN THE
SHELTER THEY HAVE SOME REALLY
UNIQUE SITUATIONS AND HAVING
FLEXIBLE FUNDING TO HELP THEM
MOVE INTO HOUSING IT REALLY
RAPIDLY INCREASES THAT WHICH
ESPECIALLY NEED IT BECAUSE
WE'VE GOT SUCH A LONG WAITING
FOR SHELTER BEDS RIGHT NOW I
WANT TO ACKNOWLEDGE THE SUPPORT
OF CURRENT COMMUNITY PARTNERS
IN THE PROGRAM IN A HOUSING
COMMISSION RIGHT AWAY CATHOLIC
CHARITIES OFFENDERS ACCESS THE
SHELTER ASSOCIATION NSW
COMMUNITY SERVICES AND THE
WASHINGTON HOUSING ALLIANCE AND
AGAIN SAY THANK YOU TO THIS
ENTIRE COUNCIL FOR YOUR SUPPORT
.
>> THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS CATHY
GRISWOLD
.
GOOD EVENING.
>> I BRING WARM WISHES FROM
NEVADA WHERE I VISITED MY GRAND
CHILDREN FOR A WEEK SO I MET A
PRETTY GOOD MOOD AND I ALSO
WANT TO COMMEND THE POLICE
DEPARTMENT THE PLAN THAT THEY
PRESENTED TONIGHT IN THE AGENDA
WHAT IS IT A C TWO IS THE BEST
,MOST PROFESSIONAL PLAN I HAVE
SEEN IN MY 20 YEARS OF WORKING
WITH AND FOR THE CITY.
I SAY THAT BECAUSE IT HAS AN
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY, IT HAS A
PROBLEM ANALYSIS.
IT HAS STRATEGIC
OBJECTIVES.
IT MENTIONS THE 60S FOR
TRANSPORTATION
PLANNING, SOME
OF THEM NOT BINDING BUT THEIR
IMPLIED IT HAS A VALUATION WITH
REAL STATISTICS AND WHAT IT IS
ADDRESSING IS OBSTRUCTIONS IN
BIKE LANES.
THAT'S A CRITICAL SAFETY ISSUE.
BUT EVEN MORE IMPORTANT THAN
OBSTRUCTIONS IN BIKE LANES ARE
OBSTRUCTION TO THE SIGHT LINE
OF PEOPLE IN THE BIKE LANES AND
THAT IS WHY I HAVE REPEATEDLY
BROUGHT UP THE ISSUE OF THE
MILLER AVENUE TWO WAY CYCLE
TRACK THAT CREATES NINETY BLIND
SPOTS.
NOW I'M NOT GOING TO DEBATE IT
WITH COUNCIL MEMBERS BUT WHAT
I'M GOING TO LET YOU KNOW IS
THAT THREE OF THE STAFF MEMBERS
WHO HAVE BEEN INVOLVED IN THIS
PROJECT ARE NO LONGER WITH THE
CITY.
IT IS INDEFENSIBLE THIS IS LIKE
SAYING THAT YOU QUESTION THE
EFFICACY OF A POLIO VACCINE
TRANSPORTATION ENGINEERING IS
AN APPLIED SCIENCE.
THERE'S NO DEBATING EITHER YOU
CAN SEE SOMETHING OR YOU CAN'T
SEE IT.
IT'S NOT A MATTER OF FEELINGS
OR SOCIAL ENGINEERING.
I HAVE A DEGREE IN SOCIAL WORK.
I KNOW WHAT THAT IS.
THIS IS ENGINEERING.
SO I HAVE APPEALED TO THE STATE
AND FEDERAL LEVEL BECAUSE THERE
ARE REGULATIONS AND LAWS THAT
APPLY TO THE PUBLIC RIGHT TO
AVOID.
I HAVE FILED A COMPLAINT WITH
LARA.
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL.
I HAVE FILED A COMPLAINT WITH
I WILL DO WHATEVER IS NECESSARY
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL.
TO STOP THIS EXTREMELY
I WILL DO WHATEVER IS NECESSARY
DANGEROUS.
TO STOP THIS EXTREMELY
>> I JUST I CAN'T UNDERSTAND
DANGEROUS.
WHY ANYONE WOULD EVEN SUPPORT
>> I JUST I CAN'T UNDERSTAND
IT WHEN I TALK TO PEOPLE AT THE
WHY ANYONE WOULD EVEN SUPPORT
STATE LEVEL AND THE FEDERAL
IT WHEN I TALK TO PEOPLE AT THE
LEVEL WITHIN ABOUT TEN WORDS
STATE LEVEL AND THE FEDERAL
THEY KNOW EXACTLY WHAT I'M
LEVEL WITHIN ABOUT TEN WORDS
TALKING ABOUT.
THEY KNOW EXACTLY WHAT I'M
THERE'S NO DEBATE SO ANYWAY,
TALKING ABOUT.
THAT'S WHERE WE STAND.
THERE'S NO DEBATE SO ANYWAY,
WHAT I ALSO WANT TO SAY IS I
THAT'S WHERE WE STAND.
COULD TURN IN AT LEAST SIX OR
WHAT I ALSO WANT TO SAY IS I
SEVEN SEACLIFF TICKETS EVERY
COULD TURN IN AT LEAST SIX OR
DAY REGARDING THE LACK OF ANY
SEVEN SEACLIFF TICKETS EVERY
TYPE OF MANAGEMENT OF OUR
DAY REGARDING THE LACK OF ANY
CONSTRUCTION ZONES THAT HAS TO
TYPE OF MANAGEMENT OF OUR
BE DONE AND THANK YOU.
CONSTRUCTION ZONES THAT HAS TO
>> THANK YOU.
BE DONE AND THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS CHUCK RHEEM
>> THANK YOU.
.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS CHUCK RHEEM
HI.
.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH FOR
HI.
ALLOWING ME TO SPEAK TONIGHT.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH FOR
I SPEAK IN OPPOSITION TO THE
ALLOWING ME TO SPEAK TONIGHT.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN THAT YOU'RE
I SPEAK IN OPPOSITION TO THE
CONSIDERING NOW.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN THAT YOU'RE
IT STARTS OUT SO WONDERFULLY
CONSIDERING NOW.
WITH ALL SORTS OF WONDERFUL
IT STARTS OUT SO WONDERFULLY
LIBERAL OBJECTIVES AND I AGREE
WITH ALL SORTS OF WONDERFUL
WITH VERY MUCH AND THEN IT GOES
LIBERAL OBJECTIVES AND I AGREE
COMPLETELY OVERBOARD IN TERMS
WITH VERY MUCH AND THEN IT GOES
OF DENSITY WITH FOUR STORIES IN
COMPLETELY OVERBOARD IN TERMS
RESIDENTIAL AREAS, SEVEN
OF DENSITY WITH FOUR STORIES IN
STORIES WHERE I LIVE LONG
RESIDENTIAL AREAS, SEVEN
PACKARD ROAD A COMPLETELY
STORIES WHERE I LIVE LONG
ABSURD THING THE NEW
PACKARD ROAD A COMPLETELY
COMPREHENSIVE AND I'M RUNNING
ABSURD THING THE NEW
FOR THE THIRD WARD SEAT AND I
COMPREHENSIVE AND I'M RUNNING
THINK EVERY CITIZEN IN ANN
FOR THE THIRD WARD SEAT AND I
ARBOR WHO REALLY LOVES ANN
THINK EVERY CITIZEN IN ANN
ARBOR IS GOING TO BECOME A
ARBOR WHO REALLY LOVES ANN
CANDIDATE FOR THE ELECTION.
ARBOR IS GOING TO BECOME A
HERE'S WHY I'M RUNNING RIGHT
CANDIDATE FOR THE ELECTION.
HERE.
HERE'S WHY I'M RUNNING RIGHT
THIS TREE WAS DROPPED IN MY
HERE.
NEIGHBORHOOD WHILE I WAS ON MY
THIS TREE WAS DROPPED IN MY
MORNING WALK.
NEIGHBORHOOD WHILE I WAS ON MY
IT WAS UPSETTING, SO DEEPLY
MORNING WALK.
UPSETTING YOU COULD HARDLY
IT WAS UPSETTING, SO DEEPLY
BELIEVE AND THEN I FIND I GO
UPSETTING YOU COULD HARDLY
DEEPER AND DEEPER AND FIND MORE
BELIEVE AND THEN I FIND I GO
LEVELS.
DEEPER AND DEEPER AND FIND MORE
HERE'S A NEIGHBORHOOD HOME.
LEVELS.
HERE'S WHAT MIGHT BE BUILT
HERE'S A NEIGHBORHOOD HOME.
RIGHT NEXT TO IT.
HERE'S WHAT MIGHT BE BUILT
THIS IS THIS GROSS ABSURDITY
RIGHT NEXT TO IT.
BUT MY MAIN CONCERN IS TREES.
THIS IS THIS GROSS ABSURDITY
THIS NEW COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
BUT MY MAIN CONCERN IS TREES.
WILL RESULT IN A MAJOR LOSS
THIS NEW COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
OF TREES IN TREE CITY.
WILL RESULT IN A MAJOR LOSS
THERE'S NO PLAN TO PROTECT
OF TREES IN TREE CITY.
TREES AND YOU CAN'T FIND OUT
THERE'S NO PLAN TO PROTECT
WHAT THE NEW RESIDENTIAL
TREES AND YOU CAN'T FIND OUT
SETBACKS WILL BE.
WHAT THE NEW RESIDENTIAL
THAT'S WHAT WILL KILL TREES IS
SETBACKS WILL BE.
MOVING BACK TO SETBACKS AND YOU
THAT'S WHAT WILL KILL TREES IS
CAN'T FIND THAT OUT.
MOVING BACK TO SETBACKS AND YOU
IT ALLOWS MORE THAN DOUBLE THE
CAN'T FIND THAT OUT.
CURRENT NUMBER OF HOMES IN ANN
IT ALLOWS MORE THAN DOUBLE THE
ARBOR.
CURRENT NUMBER OF HOMES IN ANN
IT COMPLETELY ENDS SINGLE OR
ARBOR.
DOUBLE FAMILY ZONING IN THE
IT COMPLETELY ENDS SINGLE OR
NEIGHBORHOODS.
DOUBLE FAMILY ZONING IN THE
IT ALLOWS AN APARTMENT BLOCK TO
NEIGHBORHOODS.
BE BUILT RIGHT BESIDE YOUR HOME
IT ALLOWS AN APARTMENT BLOCK TO
AND ALL THE TREES TAKEN OUT
BE BUILT RIGHT BESIDE YOUR HOME
PROVIDES NO LIMIT ON THE NUMBER
AND ALL THE TREES TAKEN OUT
OF UNITS IN THE APARTMENT BLOCK
PROVIDES NO LIMIT ON THE NUMBER
IN RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOODS.
OF UNITS IN THE APARTMENT BLOCK
NO NEED TO PROVIDE NEW PARKING.
IN RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOODS.
IT WILL NOT IT CAN'T ACCOMPLISH
NO NEED TO PROVIDE NEW PARKING.
ITS GOALS THAT'S BEEN STUDIED
IT WILL NOT IT CAN'T ACCOMPLISH
IN SEATTLE, VANCOUVER MANY
ITS GOALS THAT'S BEEN STUDIED
PLACES IT DOESN'T MAKE ANY
IN SEATTLE, VANCOUVER MANY
BETTER AFFORDABILITY OR EQUITY
PLACES IT DOESN'T MAKE ANY
THAT'S PROVEN.
BETTER AFFORDABILITY OR EQUITY
WE KNOW THAT THERE ARE THERE'S
THAT'S PROVEN.
ALMOST NO BENEFIT FOR VOTERS
WE KNOW THAT THERE ARE THERE'S
WHO LIVE HERE NOW IT'S DONE FOR
ALMOST NO BENEFIT FOR VOTERS
PEOPLE WHO MIGHT LIVE HERE
WHO LIVE HERE NOW IT'S DONE FOR
SOMEDAY.
PEOPLE WHO MIGHT LIVE HERE
THERE'S NO PROVISION FOR
SOMEDAY.
PROVIDING INFRASTRUCTURE, NO
THERE'S NO PROVISION FOR
WAY TO IMPACT FEES OR ANYWAY
PROVIDING INFRASTRUCTURE, NO
THE PEOPLE WHO LIVE HERE NOW
WAY TO IMPACT FEES OR ANYWAY
ARE GOING TO PROVIDE THE
THE PEOPLE WHO LIVE HERE NOW
INFRASTRUCTURE FOR ALL THESE
ARE GOING TO PROVIDE THE
NEW RESIDENTS.
INFRASTRUCTURE FOR ALL THESE
>> IT GIVES AWAY COMPLETELY THE
NEW RESIDENTS.
DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS FOR THE
>> IT GIVES AWAY COMPLETELY THE
FUTURE VANOVER TO MAJOR
DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS FOR THE
INVESTMENT COMPANIES AND BRINGS
FUTURE VANOVER TO MAJOR
BULLDOZERS TO THE NEIGHBORHOODS
INVESTMENT COMPANIES AND BRINGS
NOT FOR EQUAL OR LOW PRICED
BULLDOZERS TO THE NEIGHBORHOODS
HOUSING BUT FOR GENTRIFICATION
NOT FOR EQUAL OR LOW PRICED
IN ALL OF THESE CITIES WHERE WE
HOUSING BUT FOR GENTRIFICATION
STUDIED THE MOST EXPENSIVE
IN ALL OF THESE CITIES WHERE WE
HOUSING IN THE ENTIRE CITY IS
STUDIED THE MOST EXPENSIVE
THE ARE THE PLACES WHERE
HOUSING IN THE ENTIRE CITY IS
THERE'S BEEN THAT NEW
THE ARE THE PLACES WHERE
REBUILDING ACCORDING TO THEIR
THERE'S BEEN THAT NEW
ZONING PLAN.
REBUILDING ACCORDING TO THEIR
THESE ARE WONDERFUL LIBERAL
ZONING PLAN.
INTUITION INTENTIONS THAT I
THESE ARE WONDERFUL LIBERAL
SUPPORT SO MUCH BUT THEY'VE
INTUITION INTENTIONS THAT I
BEEN HIJACKED BY RUNAWAY REAL
SUPPORT SO MUCH BUT THEY'VE
ESTATE INVEST FRENZY TO HARVEST
BEEN HIJACKED BY RUNAWAY REAL
BANABA AND I COULD GO IN SOME
ESTATE INVEST FRENZY TO HARVEST
OF THE INDIVIDUALS BUT I WON'T
BANABA AND I COULD GO IN SOME
PLEASE PRESERVE TREE CITY.
OF THE INDIVIDUALS BUT I WON'T
>> THANK YOU ANEX IS BARBARA
PLEASE PRESERVE TREE CITY.
WISKY
THIS CALLER I BELIEVE
IT'S ONLINE BARBARA LITTLE
WISKY.
YES.
CAN YOU HEAR ME?
YES WE CAN.
I'M.
MY NAME IS BARBARA.
DO SKIING AND I'M A FIFTY YEAR
HOMEOWNER IN ANN ARBOR AND MY
PROFESSIONAL AREA IS OUR HUMAN
SYSTEMS AND COMPUTER SYSTEMS
ANALYSIS.
>> MIKAEL MEMBERS OF CITY
COUNCIL I APPRECIATE VERY MUCH
THE THOUGHTFUL, DEDICATED WORK
THAT HAS BEEN INVESTED IN
DEVELOPING THE DRAFT
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND ALSO
IT'S SO MANY FOLKS SEEM TO CARE
ABOUT THE SAME GOAL THAT I CARE
SO DEEPLY ABOUT WHICH IS THE
GOAL OF SUSTAINABILITY FOR THE
LONG TERM FUTURE OF A DIVERSE
COMMUNITY.
I WOULD LIKE TO MAKE FOUR BRIEF
POINTS A WHAT LOCAL
INFRASTRUCTURE IN GABRIELE'S
ARE REQUIRED TO SAFEGUARD THE
FINANCIAL FUTURE OF OUR DIVERSE
COMMUNITY IN THESE VERY
CHALLENGING TIMES THEY ARE
ACCOUNTS WE ARE CURRENTLY
FACING MANY OF THE SAME MARKET
AND HOUSING INSTABILITIES THAT
PRECEDED THE MARKET AND HOUSING
CRASH OF 2008 BUT THIS TIME
WITHOUT A FUNCTIONING FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT INFRASTRUCTURE TO
HELP BAIL US OUT OF THE CRISIS.
WHAT CAN WE DO LOCALLY TO FILL
THAT VOID?
>> OUR COMPREHENSIVE PLAN CAN
AND SHOULD BE ONE IMPORTANT
ELEMENT TO HELP PROVIDE
GABRIELE'S AND DEVELOPMENT SUCH
THAT THE DEVELOPERS TYPICALLY
PUSH FOR SHORT TERM PROFIT CAN
ALSO BENEFIT THE LONG TERM
HEALTH OF OUR COMMUNITY.
WE CAN AND SHOULD DO BOTH SHORT
TERM PROFITABILITY AND LONG
TERM SUSTAINABILITY.
OUR COMPREHENSIVE PLAN SHOULD
BE STRUCTURED TO FACILITATE
BOTH BE DURING FINANCIAL
CRISES.
THERE'S OFTEN A TREND FOR
PROPERTY OWNERSHIP TRANSFER
FROM INDIVIDUAL PERSONAL TO
CORPORATE OWNERSHIP.
IN 2008 HOUSING PRICES
PLUMMETED.
LENDING INSTITUTIONS FORECLOSED
ON THE HOME LOANS THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT STEPPED IN TO
STRENGTHEN LENDING SAFEGUARDS
TO PRESERVE PRIVATE PROPERTY
OWNERSHIP.
CONCERNINGLY, SUCH A TREND IS
RECURRING AGAIN IN TWENTY
TWENTY FIVE THIS TIME WITH
HOUSING PRICES SKYROCKETING AND
DEVELOPERS MOVING INTO THE VOID
TO CONSOLIDATE PROPERTIES AND
INCREASE DENSITIES.
THE TREND IN TWENTY TWENTY FIVE
IS PARTICULARLY CONCERNING
BECAUSE IS ESSENTIALLY
IRREVERSIBLE.
THE LARGE SCALE STEEL AND
CONCRETE STRUCTURES BUILT ON
CONSOLIDATED PARCELS WILL NOT
AGAIN BE ABLE TO BE SUBDIVIDED
INTO AFFORDABLE PARCELS TO
PERMIT INDIVIDUAL OWNERSHIP OR
COMPREHENSIVE PLANNING SHOULD
ADDRESS THIS ISSUE SEE ADDING
SUBSTANTIAL DENSITY REQUIRES
EXPANDING AND USUALLY EXISTING
INFRASTRUCTURE IF NOTHING IS
DONE EXPLICITLY THOSE FEES WILL
BE PAID BY EXISTING RESIDENTS.
AND LASTLY THE IT SEEMS
IMPORTANT TO REVISIT THE
SECTIONS OF THE PLAN THAT
SUMMARIZE RESIDENT INPUT IN THE
PROCESS AS WELL AS A LONG TERM
QUALITATIVE RESEARCH REVIEW.
IT IS MY OPINION THAT THE WORK
DONE TO DATE REPRESENTS A
COMMUNITY OUTREACH EFFORT TO
INFORM AND ENGAGE THE COMMUNITY
AND THE PROCESS IF THERE IS A
NEED FOR A STUDY TO ACTUALLY
SAMPLE AND SUMMARIZE COMMUNITY
OPINION, THEN A FORMAL STUDY
SHOULD BE DESIGNED WITH
APPROPRIATE PROTOCOLS TO
FULFILL THAT PURPOSE.
THANK THANK YOU.
>> OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS STEPHEN
TRENDA
.
OH THAT'S MY NAME.
THANK YOU.
COME ON DOWN.
PLEASURE TO TO YOU FOLKS.
I'M SO HAPPY THAT YOU WANT TO
MAKE THIS THE BEST CITY IN THE
WORLD ALWAYS HAS THE HIGHEST SO
YOU CAN ATTAIN IT.
WHEN I FIRST CAME OVER HERE AND
I REALIZE I WAS A LITTLE
CONFUSED IS THIS UNIVERSITY
OF MICHIGAN IN ANN ARBOR IS IN
IT.
>> WE DO HAVE OUR OWN IDENTITY
IS A CITY DO WE REPRESENT THE
BUILDINGS?
WE HAVE ANY ICONIC BUILDINGS
THAT REPRESENT US.
THE LANDSCAPING HAS BEEN WIPED
OUT SLOWLY SWEPT AROUND AROUND
THIS STRUCTURE.
THE BEAUTIFUL TREES WE NEED TO
MAINTAIN AN INTEGRITY AND A
COMMUNITY BECAUSE EVENTUALLY
YOU WILL LEAVE IN WHAT YOU
LEAVE BEHIND.
PEOPLE ARE GOING TO NOTICE AND
THAT IS YOUR HISTORY.
>> AT ONE POINT WE LET PEOPLE
COME.
WE BLOCK PEOPLE FROM COMING IN
HERE.
THEY HAD TO GO TO BROKEN
BOTTLES TO COME HERE WE ARE NOW
WE OPEN THE DOOR.
WHAT
ARE WE DOING?
>> WE DON'T HAVE A MASTER PLAN.
WHAT DO YOU GUYS GOING TO
LEAVE?
>> WHAT KIND OF MASTER PLAN ARE
YOU GOING TO LEAVE BEHIND?
YOU'RE GOING TO SAY WE'RE THE
PEOPLE EVERYBODY'S COMPLAINING
ABOUT THE HEIGHT OF THE
BUILDING.
I UNDERSTAND THE ECONOMICS.
I'M IN THE BUSINESS.
THE UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
HIRED ME FOR THE SCHOOL
BUSINESS SCHOOL ROSS TO COME UP
WITH DRAWINGS SO THEY CAN GET
PEOPLE TO LEND MONEY.
NOW THE LIBRARY WHICH IS WE HAD
FIVE FLOORS AND A FLOOR AND ON
THE GROUND PROPERLY UTILIZED.
NOW THEY WANT TO SOMEHOW GET
DONORS.
>> I'M CONCERNED ABOUT THE
INTEGRITY OF THE CITY AND I
WANTED TO MAKE IT THE BEST.
I HAVEN'T MADE A DIME IN THE
CITY.
I'VE DONE DRAWINGS FOR 14 YEARS
WITH ELLEN HABOUR AND WE WANT
THE BEST COMMUNITY THAT WE CAN
GET.
IT'S UP TO YOU GUYS IF YOU LET
THE LIBRARY USE THE EXCUSE THAT
THEY NEED MORE MONEY TO MARCH
AND POSSESSED.
AGREED.
LET ME WALK YOU TO WALK THROUGH
THE BUILDINGS, DO OUR TREES.
THE KIDS PLAYING THE UNIVERSITY
HAS AN EYE.
THE LIBRARY HAS AN EYE IN THE
SKY SO THEY CAN KEEP EVERYTHING
AND YOU WALK THROUGH THE MARTIN
BUILDING IT IS A PROPER WAY TO
ADDRESS A PARTICULAR SITE.
I DON'T NEED TO TAKE ANY MORE
TIME.
I'VE MADE MY POINT.
I WANT TO THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
PLEASE LEAVE SOMETHING BEHIND
PLEASE.
THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS ALAN HEBER
,WFA SAID THAT THERE'S A
BEAUTIFUL POSSIBILITY IN THE
CENTER OF THE CITY IS WHAT A
NUMBER OF PEOPLE WOULDN'T
WORKING ON SINCE 2009 AND WE
FIRST PUT FORWARD THE PROPOSAL
FOR COMMUNITY COMMONS AND HE
ALSO POINTED OUT THAT HERE WAS
A LIBRARY A COUPLE OF WEEKS AGO
OR A MONTH AGO IS REALLY
CONTRARY TO THAT VISION.
>> BUTI CATTER 20 STORIES
OF MARKET RATE HOUSING ON TOP
OF THE LIBRARY.
IT IS NOT GOING TO BE A JEWEL.
HOWEVER YOUR COTTAGE THAT WHAT
I I HAVE A LOT OF THINGS ON MY
MIND THAT I DON'T HAVE THE TIME
FOR.
I SENT YOU A LETTER.
I HOPE YOU WILL READ IT.
I DON'T HAVE TIME TO SAY ALL
OF THIS.
I TITLED INTEGRITY BECAUSE I IS
A QUESTION FOR ALL OF YOU THAT
YOU HAVE INDEED VIOLATED YOUR
OATH OF OFFICE IN YOUR OP YOUR
OBLIGATION TO THE CHARTER
OF ANN ARBOR BY ABRUPTLY
ABORTING THE PROCESS IT WAS
UNDERGOING TO DETERMINE NEXT
STEPS THE REALIZATION OF THE
CITY CHARTER DIRECTION
DEVELOPED THE CENTER OF A CITY
AS A CENTRAL PARK AND CIVIC
CENTER COMMONS AND WE HAD AN
AGREEMENT AS TO HOW THAT WOULD
BE DONE BY RFP TO GET
ADDITIONAL ADVICE BECAUSE
OF THE ADVICE FROM THE OTHERS
FROM THE COMMUNITY.
THE COUNCIL OF THE COMMONS WAS
NOT OF INTEREST OR WHATEVER SO
I SIGNED ON TO THAT AGREEMENT
OR DID THAT AGREEMENT THAT
AGREEMENT WAS TO CARRY OUT THE
VOTE OF THE PEOPLE AS IT WENT
THROUGH SEVERAL PROCESSES THE
TASK FORCE AND THEN THE COUNCIL
THE COMMONS AND I MADE IT VERY
EASY PROPOSITION OF HOW TO DEAL
WITH ALL THIS BECAUSE THE
LIBRARY DOES HAVE ITS INTEREST.
I DON'T AGREE THAT'S THE WAY TO
DO I PROPOSED A NON CONFLICT
COMPROMISE WHICH IS TO CHANGE
THE ELECTION DATE OF YOUR
PROPOSAL FROM AUGUST THIS YEAR
TO NOVEMBER 2026, WHICH IS A
REAL ELECTION THAT PEOPLE ARE
MOTIVATED TO COME OUT TO AND TO
ACTIVATE IN THIS TIME NOW HAS
THE CITY WAS DIRECTED THE
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS FOR
CONSULTANTS TO DIRECT THE NEXT
THAT WOULD BE DONE BY NOVEMBER
TWENTY SIX TWENTY TWENTY SIX
ELECTION AND THE LIBRARY BUT
ALSO HAVE THE OPPORTUNITY TO
MAKE THE PROPOSAL MORE
REASONABLE AND I'M SURE THERE'S
GOING TO BE LEGAL ACTION IF YOU
DO NOT TAKE SOME COMPROMISE
OF THIS AND I WOULD SAY THAT MY
TIME IS A MATTER OF PERSONAL
PRIVILEGE FOR OLDER PEOPLE.
IT IS VERY DIFFICULT.
I CAN OUT HERE WHEN MOST OF YOU
SPEAK WHY IS THE APPLICATION
NOT TURNED UP?
I'VE ASKED SEVERAL TIMES AND
THE AMPLIFICATION WHEN PEOPLE
SPEAK ON THAT IT SHOULD BE
HIRABLE MUCH MORE EASILY.
>> THANK YOU.
PLEASE.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS MARY
ANDERSON
.
>> MAYOR, I BELIEVE THIS CALLER
IS ON MARY HENDERSON GO AHEAD.
THANK YOU, MARY HENDERSON.
I LIVE AT 14 16 BROOKLYN
REGARDING THE COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN I AM OPPOSED TO THE
ELIMINATION OF SINGLE FAMILY
DUPLEX ZONING IN ANN ARBOR AND
THIS IS WHAT IS PROPOSED IN THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
I WANT TO ENCOURAGE ANYONE WHO
ALSO HAS CONCERNS ABOUT A
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND THE LACK
OF COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT TO
CONSIDER SIGNING THE ELECTRONIC
PETITION THAT IS CIRCULATING
ASKING THE CITY TO SUSPEND THE
PLANNING PROCESS UNTIL ALL
RESIDENTS ARE FULLY INFORMED
ABOUT THE PLAN TO GET THE LINK
FOR THIS PETITION PLEASE EMAIL
ITOU AND TO CONTACT AT GMAIL
DOT COM THAT'S A IS AN APPLE
THE NUMBER TWO AND AS A NANCY
THE NUMBER TO CONTACT GMAIL DOT
AS NOTED WHEN I SPOKE AT THE
LAST CITY COUNCIL MEETING THE
ANN ARBOR CITY COUNCIL ON
PLANNING OFFICIALS HAVE
ACKNOWLEDGED THAT THE PLAN WILL
NOT LOWER HOUSING COSTS IN ANN
ARBOR.
HOUSING COSTS ARE EXPECTED TO
CONTINUE TO RISE UNDER THE
CURRENT PLAN AS AN EXAMPLE
OF WHAT COULD BE BUILT IN A
SINGLE FAMILY OR DUPLEX.
SOME NEIGHBORHOOD IS A NEWLY
CONSTRUCTED PACKARD APARTMENT
COMPLEX WHICH IS ON PACARD NEAR
STADIUM, THE FRAZIERS PUB ON
PACKARD AND THE COMPLEX IS ONLY
THREE STORIES NOT THE FOUR
STORIES PERMITTED UNDER THE
CURRENT PLAN ALL ONE BEDROOM
APARTMENTS AND PACKARD ROW RENT
FOR BETWEEN TWO THOUSAND ONE
HUNDRED AND TWO THOUSAND THREE
HUNDRED FORTY DOLLARS AND TWO
BEDROOM APARTMENT RENT FOR TWO
THOUSAND SEVEN HUNDRED FORTY
DOLLARS TO THREE THOUSAND FIFTY
DOLLARS AND THAT'S NOT
AFFORDABLE HOUSING BUT THIS IS
THE TYPE OF HOUSING THAT UNDER
THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN WILL NOW
BE ALLOWABLE AND SINGLE FAMILY
AND DUPLEX NEIGHBORHOODS.
THE PLAN ALSO PROPOSES REDUCED
LIFELINE'S BACKS AND WOULD
ALLOW NEW CONSTRUCTION TO
ENCOMPASS ALMOST THE ENTIRE LOT
OR COMBINED LOTS.
THE PROPOSED PLAN WOULD ALLOW
DEVELOPERS TO COMBINE LOTS TO
BUILD LARGE COMPLEXES UP TO
FOUR STORIES FOUR STORIES HIGH
OR FORTY EIGHT FEET HIGH WITH
NO RESTRICTIONS ON THE NUMBER
OF APARTMENT UNITS.
A TYPICAL TWO STOREY HOUSE IS
BETWEEN TWENTY FEET AND TWENTY
FIVE FEET HIGH AS MEASURED FROM
THE GROUND TO THE ROOF PEAK SO
FORTY EIGHT FEET IS
APPROXIMATELY TWO TIMES HIGHER
THAN THE AVERAGE TWO STORY
HOUSE AND MASSIVE NEW APARTMENT
COMPLEXES THAT WOULD BE
ALLOWABLE UNDER THE CURRENT
PLAN WILL LIKELY BE BOXES SO
THEY COULD BE FOUR STORIES HIGH
ACROSS THE ENTIRE EXPANSE
OF THE COMPLEX WHEREAS A
TYPICAL TWO STORY HOME IS ONLY
TWENTY TO TWENTY FIVE FEET HIGH
AT ITS PEAK NOT ACROSS THE
ENTIRE HOUSE AND MANY
NEIGHBORHOODS THAT ARE AFFECTED
BY THE ZONING CHANGES ARE ONE
STORY HOUSES EVEN LIMITING
APARTMENT BUILDINGS TO THIRTY
FIVE FEET HIGH ISN'T A BIG
CONCESSION.
THIRTY FIVE FEET IS STILL SIXTY
TO SEVENTY FIVE PERCENT HIGHER
THAN THE AVERAGE TWO STORY
HOUSE ON PAGE FORTY SIX OF THE
PLAN THE PLAN STATES AND QUOTE
THE MAJORITY OF PEOPLE WE
ENGAGE WITH THEY'RE COMFORTABLE
WITH GENTLE DENSITY AND SINGLE
FAMILY AREAS.
GENTLE DENSITY WAS COMMUNICATED
AS A MODEST INCREASE UP TO FOUR
UNITS END QUOTE.
SO THE PLAN FOR FOUR STORY
APARTMENT BUILDINGS WITH NO
RESTRICTIONS ON THE NUMBER
OF UNITS IS IN DIRECT
OPPOSITION TO THE INPUT
RECEIVED DURING PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT.
THANK YOU.
THE SPEAKER IS JEREMY
.
OH GOOD.
THEY BRING EVERYONE TOGETHER
WITH HAILING.
I DON'T KNOW IF YOU WERE OUT
AND ABOUT DRIVING THE LAST
WEDNESDAY WHEN WE HAD ALL THAT
RAIN ONE OF YOUR STORM SEWER
TOPS BLEW UP ON WILLIAMS AND
MAYNARD WAS SO MUCH WATER AND
DRAINED IT TOTALLY BLEW IT OFF
AND PUSHED IT AWAY FROM THE
HOLE.
SO IT'S AWESOME.
I TRIED TO KICK IT BACK ON IT
JUST PULL IT BACK OFF SO
THERE'S NOTHING I COULD DO.
SO I CALLED THE WATER
DEPARTMENT THEY HAD SPRAYED
SOME STUDENTS COME OUT BUYING
OFF BUT I RECENTLY HAD A TALK
WITH SOMEBODY WHO DOES
GEOTHERMAL THERMAL AND HEAT
PUMPS AND STUFF LIKE THAT.
I ASKED THEM WHAT WAS THE LIMIT
ON THE HEAT PUMPS AND
GEOTHERMAL IS MAXED TEMPERATURE
AND STUFF AND PRETTY MUCH SUN
SET AND COLD IS PRETTY AT
SEVENTY TWO DEGREES.
SO IF YOU EVER WANT TO GO
ANYWHERE ABOVE THAT YOU WOULD
HAVE TO USE SUPPLEMENTAL
HEATING IN A BUILDING OR A ROOM
OR WHATNOT WOULD WHICH WOULD
SURPASS
ANY KIND
OF ENVIRONMENTAL FACT THAT
YOU'D WANT IF YOU'D WANT TO GET
THE ROOM HOTTER AND I AND
THEY'VE DONE QUITE A FEW
OF THEM SO THEY SHOULD KNOW AND
NEXT THING THE GUYS FROM SPOKEO
LIKE FROM OUR THE DEVELOPERS
AND THEIR FINANCIERS ARE
WILLING TO TAKE ON THAT JOB
WITH THE PARKING STRUCTURES
INCLUDED THAT SHOULD GIVE YOU A
STEP BACK IF THEY'RE NOT
WILLING TO DO IT WITH THE
PARKING STRUCTURES INCLUDED,
WHY SHOULD THE CITY BE TAKING
THAT ON IF THOSE AREN'T AND I
UNDERSTAND YOU SAY WELL IN ALL
CITIES AND THE GUY SAID IT'S A
COMMON PRACTICE.
IT'S JUST THAT PHRASE IT SOUNDS
LIKE THIS EVERYBODY DOES IT
DOESN'T SOUND RIGHT AND THAT
TOUGH ON YES.
YOU'RE NOT CHARGING TAX.
>> YOU'RE NOT YOU'RE TAKING IN
TAXES THAT'S CAN'T BE COMING IN
FROM THE PROPERTY TO PAY FOR
LEVERAGING IT AGAINST TO GET
THE BOND FOR THE PARKING
STRUCTURES SO THE CITY WON'T
SEE ANY INCOME FROM THAT FOR
THIRTY YEARS PLUS ALL THE
MAINTENANCE AND STUFF THAT'S
GOING TO BE TIED UP IN EVERY
FOUR YEARS THEY'RE GOING TO
HAVE BEEN INSPECTED AT TWO
HUNDRED TWO HUNDRED FIFTY
THOUSAND DOLLARS EACH AND IF
THEY DON'T MAKE IT THEY'RE
GOING TO HAVE SOME SPECIAL
ASSESSMENT AND THE LAST NOTE ON
THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN I HOPE
YOU KEEP IN MIND THAT I'VE I
HAVE A BROKEN NECK AND HEADED
FOR A COUPLE DECADES AND I HAD
TO MOVE FROM WHERE I WAS ON THE
WEST SIDE ANN ARBOR TO IPSE TO
LIVE IN A RANCH BECAUSE I
COULDN'T TAKE WALKING UPSTAIRS
NO MORE.
NOW IS IN THAT PLAN GOING BE
AMERICANS DISABILITY ACCEPTABLE
AND BE ABLE TO BE IN THAT PLAN
AT ALL?
>> THANK THANK YOU.
ARE THERE COMMUNICATIONS TODAY
FROM COUNCIL COUNSEL BRITISH IF
IT IS PERMISSIBLE I'D LIKE TO
TALK ABOUT A FEW THINGS I'VE
LEARNED ABOUT THE COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN.
IS IT APPROPRIATE IN THIS
MOMENT OF THE MEETING YOU HAVE
BEFORE?
I JUST WANT TO MAKE SURE I WAS
VIOLATING A RULE SO I AGREE
EVERYONE SHOULD RUN FOR OFFICE
IN THIS CITY WHO LOVES ANN
ARBOR AND EVERYONE AT THIS
TABLE DOES.
WE ARE WE ARE REVISING A
COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE PLAN TO
MAKE IT POSSIBLE FOR ANN ARBOR
TO CHANGE IN WAYS THAT ALLOW
MORE PEOPLE TO LIVE HERE.
THIS COUNCIL HAS EXPRESSED VERY
FORCEFULLY A REQUEST THAT THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN ENTERTAIN
THAT THAT THE PLANNING
COMMISSION ENTERTAIN A THREE
STORY NOT FOUR STORY LIMIT ON
NEW UNITS IN SINGLE FAMILY
RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOODS.
A COMPLETE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
MAKES IT CLEAR IN CHAPTER FOUR
THAT THERE WILL BE LIMITS ON
HOW MANY PARCELS CAN BE CAN BE
ASSEMBLED.
THOSE PARCELS WILL NOT EXTEND
FOR A FOUR BLOCK, NOT EVEN FOR
A HALF BLOCK.
THEY WILL ALSO NOT BE BOXES.
THEY WILL BE STEPPED BACK.
THOSE ARE LIMITS ON FORM THAT
ARE FORESEEN IN THE CURRENT
PLAN BUT NONE OF THOSE WILL BE
FIGURED OUT UNTIL THE ZONING.
SO THESE ARE INTIMATED THEY ARE
THEY ARE SPOKEN OF .
THEY ARE NOT FULLY SPELLED OUT
AND SHOULD NOT BE FULLY SPELLED
OUT IN THE COMPLINE YET IT IS
CLEAR WE HAVE SUGGESTED THAT
LIMITS BE ACCOMPLISHED BY FORM
RATHER THAN UNITS BECAUSE
LIMITS ON UNITS ARE
PROLIFERATING SIX BEDROOM UNITS
BECAUSE THAT'S HOW PEOPLE
MAXIMIZE VALUE IN SIX BEDROOM
UNITS THEY'RE FINE BUT I
WOULDN'T WANT TO LIVE IN ONE
UNLESS I WERE A STUDENT AND I
THINK WE WOULD LIKE OUR NEW
HOUSING TO BE ADAPTABLE AND
APPEALING TO MANY PEOPLE NOT
JUST STUDENTS ALTHOUGH WE LOVE
STUDENTS, I LOVE STUDENTS VERY
MUCH BUT THERE IS PLENTY
OF PROVISION FOR PROVIDING
INFRASTRUCTURE IN CHAPTER FOUR
OF THE PLAN AND IT IS SIMPLY I
SPENT MY WEEKEND THIS WEEKEND
READING THE ACADEMIC LITERATURE
ON PRO HOUSING COMPREHENSIVE
LAND USE PLANNING AND EVERY
SINGLE STUDY SHOWS THAT PRO
HOUSING POLICY INCREASES
AFFORDABILITY.
THERE ARE DIFFERENT WAYS IT
INCREASES AFFORDABILITY SIMPLY
BY ADDING SUPPLY.
YOU OPEN UP NEW OPPORTUNITIES.
THEY WILL COME IN AT THE MARKET
RATE BECAUSE DEVELOPERS DON'T
GIVE ANYTHING AWAY BUT THEY
WILL SLOW THE RATE OF RENTAL
INCREASE AND THAT IS NOT AN
INCENTIVE A GOOD CONTRIBUTION
TO AFFORDABILITY.
MOREOVER, THIS PLAN AND THIS
CITY IS NOT SIMPLY RELYING ON
THE MARKET TO DO OUR JOB.
WE THANKS TO THE VOTERS HAVE AN
AFFORDABLE HOUSING MILLAGE AND
WE ARE AS IS THE BEST PRACTICE
IN EVERY ONE OF THESE STUDIES
WE ARE CREATING SUBSIDIZED
HOUSING FOR INCOME QUALIFIED
HOUSEHOLDS.
WE WILL CONTINUE TO DO THAT AND
I'LL HAVE MORE CHANCE TO TALK
ABOUT THIS WEEK AFTER WEEK
COUNCIL MEMBER THIS RHETORIC
THAT'S OUR BRIGS.
I WAS JUST REFLECTING UPON YOUR
WORDS COUNCIL MEMBER BRIGS TO
EXTEND OUR DR. IT JUST WAS
MENTIONING AND THANK YOU FOR
SERVING ON COUNCIL AND
ESPECIALLY AS I'M PLANNING
COMMISSION IT IS A BIG TASK
RIGHT NOW.
YOU KNOW, I WE ARE HEARING A
LOT OF CONFUSION IN THE
COMMUNITY ABOUT WHAT'S WHAT A
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN IS VERSUS
WHAT'S PART OF ZONING AND YOU
KNOW, QUESTIONS OF DO WE LOVE
TREES OR NOT AS PREVIOUS
DIRECTOR OF SCENIC MICHIGAN, I
PROMISE YOU THAT I DO.
I ENCOURAGE FOLKS TO ATTEND ONE
OF THE THREE UPCOMING OPEN
HOUSES TO LEARN MORE AND ASK
THEIR QUESTIONS AND THEIR THEIR
POST ON THE CITY'S WEBSITE.
THE NEXT ONE IS ON THURSDAY,
APRIL 24TH FROM THREE TO SEVEN
P.M. AT WESKIT LIBRARY IN THE
FIFTH WARD.
THE NEXT ONE IS ON APRIL 30TH
AND THEN THE FOLLOWING ONE IS
ON MAY SEVEN.
SO LOTS OF OPPORTUNITIES FOR
FOLKS TO ASK THEIR QUESTIONS
AND GET THEM ANSWERED AND GET
FACTUAL INFORMATION OUT THERE.
ALSO JUST WANTED TO EXTEND MY
GRATITUDE TO OUR CITY STAFF,
QUALIFIED ENGINEERS AND
PLANNERS WHO ARE MOVING FORWARD
A REALLY STRONG PROJECT IN THE
FIFTH WARD, THE MILLER BIKEWAY
AS WELL AS LOTS OF OTHER
IMPORTANT ROADWORK THAT'LL BE
HAPPENING PART OF THAT PROJECT.
SO THANKS TO STAFF FOR THAT
WORK LOOKING FORWARD TO OH,
NOBODY IS PARTICULARLY EXCITED
ABOUT THE CONSTRUCTION IS
UNDERWAY RIGHT NOW.
I'M EXCITED TO SEE THE FINAL
PRODUCT COUNCIL MEMBER OPEN.
THANK YOU.
I WASN'T PLANNING TO TALK ABOUT
THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN BUT NOW
I'M INSPIRED.
I GUESS I WANTED TO POINT TO
THE COST OF DOING NOTHING AND
HOW THE STATUS QUO IS NOT
WORKING.
I HEAR A LOT OF PEOPLE TALK
ABOUT WELL WE HEAR SEVERAL
PEOPLE MAKE CLAIMS THAT IT DOES
NOTHING FOR THE COST OF HOUSING
WHILE CITING NO EVIDENCE
COUNCIL MEMBER TO, YOU KNOW,
CITED SOME OF THE EVIDENCE.
BUT I WOULD POINT PEOPLE TO A
RECENT PEW ARTICLE THAT
ACTUALLY LOOKED AT THE EFFECT
ZONING CHANGES AND THE INCREASE
IN KEEPING RENT GROWTH IN
MINNEAPOLIS THE RENT GROWTH WAS
ONE PERCENT AFTER ENACTING SOME
OF THE TYPES OF ZONING CHANGES
THAT WE'RE CONSIDERING WHEREAS
IN OTHER COMPARABLE COMMUNITIES
LIKE THE US OVERALL IT WAS
THIRTY ONE PERCENT OVER THE
YEARS OF TWENTY SEVENTEEN TO
TWENTY TWENTY THREE AND IN MY
OWN NEIGHBORHOOD WHICH IS VERY
MODEST SMALL HOUSES HOW SALES
ARE GOING FOR SIX HUNDRED
THOUSAND UP SO THAT'S I DON'T
KNOW WHAT WHERE PEOPLE THINK WE
HAVE AFFORDABILITY HAPPENING
NOW WE NEED MORE SUPPLY.
IT'S VERY CLEAR AND I LOOK
FORWARD TO SUPPORTING POLICIES
THAT PUSH THAT FORWARD AND THE
REMAINING TIME THAT I HAVE I
DID WANT POINT PEOPLE TO THE
ATTACHED REPORT THAT WE HAVE
FROM THE POLICE CHIEF ABOUT THE
RESPONSE TO ENHANCED
ENFORCEMENT OF BICYCLE LANE
ORDINANCE IS THAT'S A MOUTHFUL
BUT GIVE IT A READ.
I APPRECIATE THE PLAN AND I
GUESS I WOULD JUST POINT TO A
COUPLE OF THINGS THAT STOOD OUT
TO ME.
ONE, WHEN WE LOOK AT THE
COMPARISON OVER THE LAST COUPLE
OF YEARS OF COMPLAINTS VERSUS
TICKETS AND LETTERS, YOU KNOW,
CITING THE ILLEGAL BEHAVIOR
KIND OF INVERSED SO THE TICKETS
HAVE GONE DOWN, LETTERS HAVE
GONE DOWN WHILE THE COMPLAINTS
HAVE GONE UP.
SO VERY OBVIOUS IN THAT DATA
AND WHAT WE HEAR FROM PEOPLE
THAT WE HAVE A PROBLEM THAT WE
NEED TO SOLVE.
I APPRECIATE THE TARGETED
ENFORCEMENT AND WHAT I'M MOST
LOOKING FORWARD TO IS THE
ENGAGEMENT WITH THE BIKE
ADVOCACY GROUPS BECAUSE THEY
RIDE THESE EVERY DAY THEY KNOW
WHERE THE PROBLEMS ARE.
I THINK THEY'RE GOING TO HAVE A
PRETTY GOOD SENSE OF ADDITIONAL
AREAS WHERE WE NEED TO FOCUS
AND I WAS ALSO VERY GLAD TO SEE
IN THE BUDGET INCREASED BUDGET
FOR COMMUNITY STANDARDS OFFICER
BECAUSE I THINK THAT'S GOING TO
HELP.
THANK YOU COUNCIL MEMBER IA
THANK YOU.
I JUST WANTED TO TAKE A MINUTE
TO EXPRESS HOW HEARTBROKEN I AM
BY THE LOSS OF A WORKER IN A
RECENT TRAGIC ACCIDENT ON A
STREET PROJECT IN MY WORK AND I
WANTED TO EXTEND MY DEEPEST
CONDOLENCES TO THOSE WORKERS
FAMILY, THEIR FRIENDS, THEIR
COWORKERS AS SOMEONE WHO'S LONG
PRIORITIZED WORKER SAFETY, I
BELIEVE IT'S OUR RESPONSIBILITY
TO ENSURE THAT EVERY JOB SITE
IN OUR CITY MEETS THE HIGHEST
STANDARDS OF WORKER PROTECTION
WHILE WE DON'T KNOW YET EXACTLY
HOW THIS ACCIDENT HAPPENED, I
WANTED
EXPRESS THAT I WILL BE
WATCHING CLOSELY FOR THE
RESULTS THE MILESTONE
INVESTIGATION TO UNDERSTAND THE
CIRCUMSTANCES AND TO SEE IF ANY
CHANGES ARE NEEDED TO FROM THE
CITY'S PERSPECTIVE TO ENHANCE
WORKER SAFETY.
NO ONE SHOULD FEAR FOR THEIR
LIFE AT WORK, ESPECIALLY WHEN
THEY'RE DOING THE ESSENTIAL
LABOR OF REBUILDING OUR ROADS.
EVERY WORKER DESERVES TO COME
HOME SAFE TO THEIR FAMILY AT
THE END OF THE DAY THAT MUST
ALWAYS BE OUR TOP PRIORITY.
>> COUNCILMAN MALIK FOR WARD
TWO COUNCIL MEMBER WATSON AND I
WOULD LIKE TO INVITE FOLKS TO
OUR NEXT WARD TO LISTENING
SESSION ON SATURDAY MAY 10TH
FROM THREE TO FOUR P.M. AT THE
TREYVAUD LIBRARY PROGRAM ROOM.
>> I HOPE TO SEE YOU THERE.
THANKS FOR THE COMMUNICATION
FROM COUNCIL COUNCIL MEMBER
HARRISON.
I WOULD LIKE TO THANK YOU,
MAYOR.
I WOULD JUST LIKE TO AT LEAST
COUNCILMAN REDISH AND I WOULD
LIKE TO THANK JENNIFER HALL OR
TENDING AND BEING OUR SPECIAL
GUEST LAST WEEK AT OUR
COFFEE HOUR AND SO PLEASE STAY
TUNED FOR OUR UPCOMING WHERE WE
HOPE TO HAVE YES.
JUST US.
THANK
COUNCIL OVER CORNELL.
>> I WAS GOING TO ASK IF I
COULD SEED MY TIME TO DR. DISH
BECAUSE SHE WAS INCREDIBLY
INSPIRATIONAL IN HER COMMENTS.
BUT ABSENT OF THAT BEING A
POSSIBILITY, I WANT TO THANK
EVERYONE WHO CAME OUT MY AWARD
MEAT COUNCIL MEMBER RIGGS AND
MR. LEINERT FROM CITY STAFF WHO
CAME OUT ON SATURDAY AND MET US
AT THE LIBRARY TO TALK ABOUT
COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE PLAN.
THERE WAS IT WAS AN INTERESTING
CONVERSATION AND I THINK WHEN
WE CAN GET TOGETHER FACE TO
FACE AND TALK ABOUT THINGS
INSTEAD KEYBOARD WE'RE HEARING
IT.
>> IT'S REALLY HELPFUL.
THAT'S WHAT IT MEANS TO BE PART
OF A COMMUNITY AND TO AN
EARLIER COMMENT I JUST WANT TO
SAY THE IDEA OF LIVING ABOVE A
LIBRARY SOUNDS LIKE HEAVEN.
SO THE IDEA OF WHETHER OR NOT
IT'S A JEWEL IS REALLY
CONFUSING TO ME.
IT SOUNDS AMAZING ME AND POOR
FOLKS BECAUSE I KNOW THAT THIS
IS GOING TO COME UP AS PART
OF A COMMUNITY CONVERSATION
THIS SUMMER WHO AREN'T FAMILIAR
WITH IT PRIOR TO BEING ELECTED
TO COUNCIL I SERVED ON THE
COUNCIL OF THE COMMONS AND FROM
TWENTY NINETEEN TO TWENTY
TWENTY THREE THERE WAS A LOT
OF COMMUNITY CONVERSATION,
THERE WAS A LOT OF INPUT.
THERE WAS AN ENTIRE COMMISSION
WITH CITY STAFF INVOLVED WHO
EVALUATED, LOOKED AT, TALKED
WITH LOCAL BUSINESS OWNERS.
THIS WAS A REALLY COMPREHENSIVE
PROCESS TO DELIVER TO COUNCIL
BACK NEXT STEPS FOR THE CENTER
OF THE CITY.
THE IDEA THAT NOTHING HAPPENED
FROM THE TIME THAT THE CHARTER
AMENDMENT WAS PASSED TO TODAY
AND TO THE UPCOMING POTENTIAL
BALLOT INITIATIVE IS IS NOT
EXACTLY ACCURATE.
THERE WAS NEVER A PROMISE FOR
AN RFP AND IN FACT IN TWENTY
TWENTY THREE THIS COUNCIL
PASSED RESOLUTION PUTTING IT
BACK IN PARKS AND PART OF THAT
WAS BECAUSE THE COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN FOR THE PARK SYSTEM
INDICATED THAT THE MAJORITY
OF CITIZENS DIDN'T APPROVE
OF SPENDING MONEY ON A NEW
PARK.
IN FACT THEY WANTED TO INVEST
IN OUR EXISTING PARKS AND
IMPROVE THEM.
SO FOR FOLKS OR MAYBE NEW TO
THIS ISSUE AND JUST HEARING IT
FOR THE FIRST TIME I WOULD
REALLY RECOMMEND DIGGING INTO
THE HISTORY AND LOOKING THROUGH
IT BECAUSE THERE IS IT OVER
FOUR YEARS AT LEAST FROM A CITY
PERSPECTIVE, ELECTED OFFICIALS
,A PUBLIC COMMISSION CITY
STAFF TIME THAT WAS INVOLVED IN
EVALUATING IT.
AND THERE'S THERE'S A LOT
OF GOOD INFORMATION OUT THERE
SO AND IT'S ALL AVAILABLE
ONLINE.
>> THANK YOU FOR THE
COMMUNICATION FROM COUNCIL
.
>> OH THE RESOLUTION TO APPOINT
MEMBERS OF THE ANN ARBOR
BUILDING AUTHORITY BOARD FOR
CONSIDERATION AT OUR NEXT
MEETING.
WE NOW HAVE THE FORCE THE
CONSENT AGENDA MAY HAVE A
MOTION PLEASE TO APPROVE THE
CONSENT MOVE BY COUNCILOR DENHA
BY COUNCIL MEMBER WATSON
DISCUSSION OF THE CONSENT
AGENDA ALL IN FAVOR OR OPPOSED
THE CONSENT AGENDA WITH 11
COUNCIL MEMBERS PRESENT VOTING
IN THE AFFIRMATIVE IS APPROVED
THAT SATISFIED THE EIGHT VOTE
REQUIREMENT WITH RESPECT TO
SEVEN TO EIGHT CNR NO RATHER
SEE A TWELVE AND THAT IS ALL WE
NOW COME TO A SET OF PUBLIC
HEARINGS, PUBLIC HEARINGS ARE
OPPORTUNITIES FOR MEMBERS
OF THE PUBLIC TO SPEAK TO
COUNCIL.
THE COMMUNITY ABOUT A SPECIFIC
ITEM ON THE AGENDA TO SPEAK AT
A PUBLIC HEARING ONE NEED NOT
HAVE SIGNED UP IN ADVANCE BUT
YOUR SPEECH MUST RELATE TO THE
SPECIFIC SUBJECT MATTER OF THE
PUBLIC HEARING THAT IS TO SAY A
SPECIFIC ITEM ON THE AGENDA TO
WHICH THE PUBLIC HEARING
RELATES SPEAKERS IN ALL
INSTANCES WILL HAVE THREE
MINUTES IN WHICH TO SPEAK.
SO PLEASE PAY CLOSE ATTENTION
TO THE TIME OUR CLERK OR THE
TIME CLOCK WILL NOTIFY WHEN
THIRTY SECONDS ARE REMAINING
AND WHEN YOUR TIME HAS EXPIRED,
WHEN YOUR TIME HAS EXPIRED
PLEASE CONCLUDE REMARKS AND
CEDE THE FLOOR PUBLIC HEARING
NUMBER ONE AN AUDIENCE TO AMEND
SECTION FIVE THAT ONE FIVE AND
5.1 OF CHAPTER FIFTY FIVE
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE OF
TITLE FIVE OF THE CODE OF THE
CITY BANABA.
IS THERE ANYONE IN HOUSE WOULD
LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS PUBLIC?
IS THERE ANYONE A LINE WOULD
LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS PUBLIC
HEARING
?
MAYOR, I DON'T SEE ANYONE ON
LINE FOR THIS HEARING
SEE NO
ONE.
THIS PUBLIC HEARING IS CLOSED
PUBLIC HEARING NO TO AN
AUDIENCE TO AMEND SECTION FIVE
THAT ONE SEVEN FIVE TO SEVEN
FIVE TO EIGHT OF CHAPTER FIFTY
FIVE FIVE DEVELOPMENT CODE OF
TITLE FIVE BUILDING DESIGN
REQUIREMENTS AND PRELIMINARY
PRIMARY AND SECONDARY STREETS
DESIGN REVIEW BOARD AND DESIGN
REVIEW AND TO APPEAL SECTION
ONE TO THREE NINE CHAPTER EIGHT
TITLE ONE OF THE CODE OF THE
CITY BANABA.
IS THERE ANYONE IN HOUSE WOULD
LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS PUBLIC
HEARING
?
IS THERE ANYONE ONLINE WOULD
LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS PUBLIC
MARRIED TO ANYONE ONLINE FOR
THIS HEARING
?
SEE NO ONE THIS PUBLIC HEARING
IS CLOSED PUBLIC HEARING NUMBER
THREE INSTRUMENT CHAPTER THIRTY
FOUR GAS FRANCHISE AND REPLACE
IT WITH A NEW KEATING FRANCHISE
AND ADOPT ACCOMPANYING
AGREEMENT REGARDING CLIMATE
ACTION.
>> IS THERE ANYONE IN HOUSE
WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS
PUBLIC HEARING?
IS THERE A LINE I WOULD LIKE TO
SPEAK AT THIS PUBLIC HEARING
?
>> I DON'T SEE ANYONE ONLINE
FOR THIS HEARING
.
SEE NO ONE THIS PUBLIC HEARING
IS CLOSED.
WE HAVE BEFORE US THE REGULAR
MEETING MINUTES OF APRIL SEVEN
.
TWENTY TWENTY FIVE.
I HAVE THE MOTION PLEASE TO
APPROVE THESE MINUTES MOVE BY
COUNCIL MEMBER WATSON SECONDED
BY COUNCIL MEMBER DENHA
DISCUSSION OF THE MINUTES OR
FAVOR OR OPPOSED THE MINUTES
ARE APPROVED B1 AND BOARD AMEND
SECTION 5.1 FIVE AND FIVE THAT
ONE SIX OF CHAPTER FIFTY FIVE
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE OF
TITLE FIVE OF THE CODE OF THE
CITY THEN ARBER MOVE BY COUNCIL
MEMBER DICH SECOND BY COUNCIL
MEMBER CORNHILL DISCUSSION
PLEASE BE ONE COUNCIL MEMBER I
CAN DO THIS ALREADY SO I WILL
JUST REMIND YOU THAT THIS IS A
STAFF PROPOSED AMENDMENT TO
REMOVE USE SPECIFIC STANDARDS
RELATED TO GENERAL ENTERTAIN
USES AND THESE THESE
RESTRICTIONS DATE BACK TO AN
EARLIER TIME WITH I SHALL SAY
DIFFERENT STANDARDS
OF PROPRIETY THAN WE HAVE
TODAY.
SO APPROVAL OF THIS ITEM WOULD
REMOVE THE LIMITATIONS AND
RESTRICTIONS, LIMIT THE SEATING
CAPACITY OF ENCLOSED THEATERS
IN THE COMMUNITY CONVENIENCE
CENTER AND DISTRICT I SHOULD
SAY NOT AS IF THERE'S A CENTER
AND WOULD ALSO ALLOW AH PINBALL
PARLORS HEAVENS TO BETSY TO
OPERATE WHERE OTHER GENERAL
RETAINMENT USES ARE PERMITTED.
>> I WILL BE SUPPORTING THIS
AND I LOOK FORWARD TO HEARING
HOW YOU ALL VOTE ON IT FURTHER
DISCUSSION
OF FAVOR OR OPPOSE
IT IS APPROVED COUNCILOR
PETITION UNANIMOUS YOU MEAN
CHALK UP ANOTHER VICTORY FOR
PINBALL PARLORS NEED TO IN
ORDER TO AMEND SECTION FIVE
THAT ONE SEVEN FIVE TO SEVEN
AND FIVE TO EIGHT OF CHAPTER
FIFTY FIVE UNIFIED VELTMAN
CODE OF TITLE FIVE BUILDING
DESIGN REQUIREMENTS ON PRIMARY
AND SECONDARY STREETS DESIGN
REVIEW BOARD AND DESIGN REVIEW
AND TO REPEAL SECTION ONE TWO
THREE NINE OF CHAPTER EIGHT
OF TITLE ONE OF THE CODE OF THE
CITY THEN ARBER MOVE BY COUNCIL
MEMBER ACKMANN SECONDED BY
COUNCIL MEMBER TO DISH
DISCUSSION PLEASE BE TO HOUSE
MEMBER AKMAN.
I'D LIKE TO PROPOSE AN
AMENDMENT TO THIS TO REMOVE THE
CHANGES RESTRICTING THE ACCESS
THE EXTERIOR INSTALLATION
OF SYSTEMS AND I SENT MY
CHANGES TO THIS BRODERIE
THAT
THERE A SECOND SECOND BY
COUNCIL MEMBER BRINGS COUNCIL
BACK YOU THE FLOOR
.
THANKS.
SO WE TALKED A LITTLE ABOUT
THIS LAST TIME BUT MAINLY I
HAVE CONCERNS WITH THE
BERRYVILLE AND THE
COMPATIBILITY OF THIS MATERIAL
WITH OUR CLIMATE IN SOUTHEAST
MICHIGAN.
SO I'M NOT AN EXPERT ON
BUILDING MATERIALS BUT FROM
WHAT I CAN GLEAN THIS MATERIAL
WORKS WELL AND DRY AND WARM
CLIMATES AND IT'S OFTEN CHOSEN
BECAUSE IT'S CHEAPER AND IT'S
MORE FLEXIBLE TO DESIGN.
IT'S INSULATING MATERIAL.
BUT IN WHAT ARE COLDER CLIMATES
LIKE THE ONES THAT WE HAVE HERE
ESPECIALLY WITH A LOT OF FREEZE
AND CYCLES, THE MATERIAL HAS A
HISTORY OF UNDERPERFORMING AND
KIND OF FALLING APART OVER TIME
SO IT HAS FASTER DETERIORATION,
COSTLY REPAIRS AND POTENTIALLY
SHORTER BUILDING LIFE SPANS.
NOW MAYBE I'M NOT COMPLETELY UP
TO DATE THE TECHNOLOGY BUT FROM
WHAT I CAN HOLD STAFF HASN'T
REALLY BEEN ABLE TO PROVIDE US
WITH IN-DEPTH INFORMATION ABOUT
WHY THE BENEFITS OUTWEIGH THE
POTENTIAL DOWNSIDES.
SO I THINK IT'S PREMATURE TO
LIFT THIS RESTRICTION.
I'M CERTAINLY OPEN TO
CONSIDERING IT IN THE FUTURE IF
MORE INFORMATION IS PROVIDED AT
THIS POINT I THINK IT'S BEST TO
KEEP IT IN PLACE FOR THE
DISCUSSION.
MR.
I NOTICED THAT IN THE ITEM
THERE WAS A STAFF REPORT THAT
WAS INITIALLY ATTACHED.
THE QUESTION I HAVE IS HAS ANY
MEMBER OF THE STAFF SEEN THE
AMENDMENT?
OK, OR THE DISCUSSION COUNCIL
MEMBER DENHA I GUESS I GUESS
I'M WONDERING IF THERE'S ANYONE
FROM STAFF WHO COULD MAYBE
SPEAK TO THEIR PERSPECTIVE ON
THE AMENDMENT
MR. LEINERT IS
ON.
>> SO PLEASE
AND THE MAYOR AND
COUNCIL RIGHT AWAY AND I HAVE
SEEN THE AMENDMENTS.
I DON'T HAVE ANY CONCERNS JUST
TO UH REITERATE WHEN THIS WAS
DISCUSSED AT FIRST READING THIS
WAS A PROPOSED CHANGE THAT
STAFF HAD ADDED TO SOME OF THE
MORE DIRECT DIRECTIVE CHANGES
THAT RESULTED FROM YOUR APRIL
LAST YEAR RESOLUTIONS THERE ARE
DEFINITELY TRADE OFFS WITH
THIS.
I THINK I FULLY ACKNOWLEDGE
THAT I THINK MOST OF ITS
APPLICATIONS IN MICHIGAN ARE
OF THE LOWER QUALITY VERSIONS
OF THIS PRODUCT.
I THINK THAT'S WHY IT GETS
USED.
IT DOES PROVIDE INSULATED VALUE
BUT THERE ARE OF COURSE TRADE
OFFS.
WE'RE UNCOMFORTABLE WITH THE
CHANGES AS PRESENTED FOR THE
DISCUSSION.
THANK YOU FOR THE DISCUSSION
COUNCIL BRITISH.
>> I THINK THERE MIGHT BE A
MISTAKE IN THE WAY THE
AMENDMENT IS HAPPENING.
UM, BECAUSE I THINK IT DOESN'T
REMOVE IT THE IF YOU WANT NO
BUT ARE PERMITTED YEAH.
LET'S YEAH DO READ IT THROUGH
OK WE'RE CONFUSED.
LOOK BASICALLY WHAT I
UNDERSTOOD STAFF TO BE
PROPOSING IS THAT IN THE TEXT
THAT I SENT YOU UNDER A
HIGHLIGHTED TEXT HAD A STRIKE
THROUGH IT NO LONGER HAS
STRAIGHT THROUGH SO IT'S
STAYING IN A RESTRICTED OH ERM
OH SHOOT SORRY BUT I INTENDED
TO REMOVE I'M SORRY I THINK
THIS WAS LOST IN TRANSLATION SO
YES THAT SHOULD BE STRUCK
THROUGH AND BE THAT SHOULD BE
STRUCK THROUGH I THINK THAT'S
HOW IT GOES RIGHT YES.
AND I THOUGHT I DID IT RIGHT
BUT IF THIS IS WHAT I DID THIS
IS THE OPPOSITE SO JUST TO BE
IT WAS CIRCULATED MR SO THE
THOUGHT WELL LET'S DO THIS WE
HAVE WHAT WE GOT.
YEAH WE HAVE CHECKED IT THERE'S
BEEN TEXT PROPOSED THAT TEXT
SEEMS TO BE INCONSISTENT WITH
THE MOVERS DESIRES SINCE IT'S
NO LONGER THE MOVERS IT'S THE
COUNCIL'S PERHAPS WE REJECT
THIS AMENDMENT AND THEN THERE
WILL BE ANOTHER AMENDMENT
OFFERED WHICH WILL BE
CONSISTENT.
LET ME FORWARD I'M GOING TO
FORWARD THE CORRECT ONE SO I'M
GOING TO WITHDRAW ONCE IT'S
EVEN ONCE IT'S MOVED AND
THERE'S NOT A POINT ABOUT
SUPPORTING
MISS CORE
.
I THINK WHAT YOU PROPOSE IS
CORRECT ME OR REJECT THE FIRST
AMENDMENT AND THEN HAVE A
SECOND AMENDMENT WITH THE
CORRECT TEXT FOR FURTHER
DISCUSSION OF THE OF THE
DISFAVORED AMENDMENT IN FAVOR
OR OPPOSED THE DISFAVORED
AMENDMENT FAILS UNANIMOUSLY.
COUNCIL MEMBER PAKMAN OH IS
THIS COMING FROM AKMAN OR DISH
COUNCILOR REDISH WOULD YOU CARE
TO WALK THROUGH?
YES.
OK SO WHAT I HAVE JUST SENT WAS
THE INTENDED CHANGE AND IN THE
INTENDED CHANGE UNDER A TABLE
READ THE FOLLOWING MATERIALS
ARE PERMITTED ON FACADES
VISIBLE FROM PRIMARY OR
SECONDARY STREETS WOOD WHICH IS
IN ADDITION TO THE CURRENT UDC
GLASS BRICK CUTS STONE CAST
STONE EXTERIOR INSULATION
FINISHING SYSTEMS WHICH WAS
PROPOSED ADDITION IS STRUCK
THROUGH OR HIGH QUALITY
FINISHED MATERIAL ETC. UNDER B
IT WILL READ THE FOLLOWING
MATERIALS ARE PROHIBITED ON
FACADES VISIBLE FROM PRIMARY
AND SECONDARY STREETS ALUMINUM
OR VINYL SIDING OR AN EXTERIOR
INSULATION FINISHING SYSTEM
EXCEPT FOR MINOR DESIGN
ACCIDENTS EIGHT FEET ABOVE THE
LEVEL OF THE ADJACENT SIDEWALK
STAND BY COUNCIL MEMBER ACKMANN
FOR FURTHER DISCUSSION.
COUNCILOR THANK YOU MR LEONARD.
GOOD.
IF YOU COULD JUST KIND RECAP
FOR US WHY STAFF PROPOSED
REMOVING THIS IN THE FIRST
PLACE AND HOW YOU FELT IT
COMPORTED WITH OUR ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT RESOLUTIONS FROM
LAST YEAR BY THE I APOLOGIZE
FOR ANY CONFUSION.
I DON'T THINK IT'S RELATIVE TO
YOUR ECONOMIC OR RESOLUTIONS.
THIS WEEK WE WERE MAKING
PROPOSED MODIFICATIONS TO THIS
PORTION OF THE ORDINANCE AS
PART OF THE CHANGES TO THE
DESIGN REVIEW PROCESS WHICH IS
ALSO INCLUDED IN THIS SET
OF CHANGES WHILE THERE I
RECEIVED FEEDBACK OVER THE LAST
COUPLE OF YEARS.
THAT IS A WAY THAT AN INSULATOR
VALUE CAN BE ADDED TO THE
EXTERIOR BUILDINGS IN ADDITION
TO ANY OTHER STRUCTURAL ASPECTS
THAT WOULD INCREASE THE ENERGY
EFFICIENCY OF THOSE BUILDINGS.
IT COMES WITH TRADEOFFS AS
INDICATED THE PRODUCT IS NOT
TERRIBLY DURABLE IN ITS MOST
COMMON AND COST EFFECTIVE FORM
TO ACHIEVE THAT INSULATED VALUE
IT USES FOAM WHICH IS NOT GREAT
FROM A CARBON PERSPECTIVE.
SO AGAIN IT WAS PROVIDED WHILE
WE WERE IN THE SECTION.
I DON'T THINK IT'S SPECIFICALLY
RELEVANT TO THE PROPOSED
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
RESOLUTIONS.
>> THANK YOU FOR THE DISCUSSION
OF THE AMENDMENT ON FAVOR OR
OPPOSED THE AMENDMENT IS
APPROVED FURTHER DISCUSSION
OF BE2 AS AMENDED MEMBER BREAKS
.
I JUST WANTED TO CONTINUE SOME
OF THE CONCERNS THAT I RAISED
LAST TIME.
I'M COMFORTABLE SUPPORTING THIS
AND I THINK WE HAD A GOOD
CONVERSATION AT IT LAST TIME I
CONTINUE TO THINK THAT ONE
OF THE THE BIGGEST CONCERNS
THAT I HAVE HEARD FROM FOLKS
RELATED THAT RESONATES WITH ME
RELATED TO DENSITY IN THE
DOWNTOWN IS THAT A LOT OF TIMES
FOLKS ARE NOT REALLY CONCERNED
WITH DENSITY.
THEY'RE JUST CONCERNED THEY
WOULD LIKE TO SEE A HIGHER
QUALITY OF BUILDINGS AND
BUILDING DESIGN IN OUR
COMMUNITY AND I DON'T THINK
THAT THIS IS KIND OF WHAT THIS
WAS INTENDED TO THE DESIGN
REVIEW BOARD WAS INTENDED TO
GET LEVERAGE ON AND WITH IT'S
BEEN SHARED WITH US THAT THAT'S
WE HAVEN'T GAINED TRACTION
GOING THIS ROUTE.
BUT I DO THINK THIS CONTINUES
TO BE AN AREA HOPEFULLY THROUGH
THE COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE
PLANNING PROCESS AND SUBSEQUENT
CODE REVISIONS THAT I THINK IS
A PRIORITY FOR OUR COMMUNITY.
I DON'T THINK IT SHOULD BE A
PRIORITY JUST DOWNTOWN.
I THINK IT SHOULD BE A PRIORITY
EVERYWHERE THAT WE HAVE PRIDE
IN OUR BUILT DESIGN AND OUR
BUILDING FORMS AND I THINK THAT
WE NEED TO CONTINUE TO EXPLORE
HOW WE MOVE THAT FOR FURTHER
DISCUSSION.
>> COUNCIL.
YEAH, I JUST WANTED TO SPEAK TO
SOME CONCERNS THAT EMERGED THAT
THAT SUGGESTED THAT BY
ELIMINATING A DESIGN REVIEW
BOARD WE'RE ELIMINATING DESIGN
REVIEW AND I WANT TO MAKE SURE
THAT IT'S CLEAR THAT THE IDEA
HERE IS TO REASSIGN DESIGN
REVIEW AND INTEGRATE IT INTO
THE EXISTING PROCESS RATHER
THAN HAVING DESIGN REVIEW OCCUR
BY A SECOND BY A SEPARATE BOARD
WHICH HAS ITS OWN PROCESS
AND
HAPPENS REALLY, REALLY HOLDS UP
SUBMISSION OF THE SITE AND
THAT'S WHAT THE DESIGN REVIEW
PROCESS AS IT IS CURRENTLY
STRUCTURED DOES.
SO DESIGN REVIEW BY THE DRP BY
DESIGN REVIEW BOARD CAN ADD A
MONTH OR MORE TO THE
DEVELOPMENT PROCESS BECAUSE IT
HAS TO COMPLY WITH OPEN
MEETINGS ACT WHICH IS A GOOD
ACT.
THAT ACT HAS ADVANCED NOTICE
REQUIREMENTS AND THE DESIGN
REVIEW BOARD HAS TO MEETING HAS
TO BE HELD PRIOR TO OTHER
MEETINGS SUCH AS THE REQUIRED
CITIZEN PARTICIPATION MEETING A
MEETING THAT ALSO HAS TO BE
NOTICED IN ADVANCE AND MUST BE
HELD TEN DAYS PRIOR TO SUBMIT A
LIVE SITE PLAN.
SO I'M CONFUSING YOU AND I
DON'T MIND DOING THAT BECAUSE
I'M TRYING TO INDICATE HOW MUCH
IS STACKED INTO THE PROCESS
BEFORE THE SITE PLAN CAN EVEN
BE SUBMITTED.
SO TOGETHER THESE CAN DELAY
SITE PLANS MIDDLE ANOTHER MORE
AS I SAID AND CURRENTLY DESIGN
REVIEW IS GUIDED BY THE PLANNER
ASSIGNED TO THE PROPOSED
PROJECT WHO WRITES UP A REPORT
ABOUT THE RELATIONSHIP OF THE
PROJECT TO THE DESIGN REVIEW
STANDARDS AND PRESENT THAT TO
THE DESIGN REVIEW BOARD.
>> THAT REPORT WILL STILL
HAPPEN.
IT WILL BE PRESENTED TO THE
PLANNING COMMISSION OR THE CITY
COUNCIL DEPENDING ON WHO THE
APPROVING BODY IS AND IT WILL
ALSO HAVE BEEN PRESENTED TO THE
APPLICANT WHO IS FREE TO FOLLOW
OR NOT FOLLOW THE SUGGESTIONS
AND THE REASON WHY DESIGN
FEEDBACK IS NOT BINDING ON THE
APPLICANT IS BECAUSE TO MAKE A
DIRECTION BINDING YOU HAVE TO
BE ABLE TO MEASURE IT AND
DESIGN GUIDELINES ARE NOT EASY
TO MEASURE AS WE KNOW ONE
PERSON'S FABULOUS IMPROVEMENT
CAN BE ANOTHER PERSON'S
EYESORE.
>> SO IF THE DESIGN REVIEW
BOARD IS ELIMINATED, DESIGN
REVIEW WILL STILL OCCUR OR THE
DISCUSSION WILL FAVOR OR
OPPOSED IT IS APPROVED BY THREE
AN AUDIENCE TO AMEND CHAPTER
THIRTY FOUR GAS FRANCHISE AND
REPLACE IT WITH A NEW HEATING
FRANCHISE AND ADOPT A COMPANY
AGREEMENT REGARDING CLIMATE
ACTION BY COUNCIL MEMBER OR
SECOND BY COUNCIL MEMBER
KERNELL DISCUSSION PLEASE OF B
THREE CASIMIRA O THE NEXT.
>> YEAH I'LL BE BRIEF BECAUSE I
SPOKE AT LENGTH ABOUT THIS AT
FIRST READING SO I JUST WILL
SAY I'M THRILLED TO SUPPORT
THIS HEATING FRANCHISE
AGREEMENT.
THIS REPRESENTS A MAJOR STEP
FORWARD TOWARD A CARBON FREE
FUTURE FOR ANN ARBOR FOR THE
FIRST TIME WE ARE OPENING A
DOOR TO A FUTURE BEYOND GAS
WHEN WE'RE CLEAN, RENEWABLE
GEOTHERMAL ENERGY CAN POWER OUR
HOMES AND OUR BUSINESSES AND
ALL OF OUR BUILDINGS.
THIS IS ABOUT CLIMATE ACTION,
ENERGY CHOICE AND SETTING THE
STAGE FOR A NEW KIND OF UTILITY
PARTNERSHIP ONE THAT ALIGNS
WITH OUR VALUES AND OUR FUTURE
.
ECHOING THAT, I'D LIKE TO GIVE
STAFF A GREAT DEAL OF THANKS
FOR THE FOR THE NEGOTIATING
WORK THEY DID ON THE GROUND
WORKING WITH OUR GAS PROVIDER
BUT ALSO WITH THE VISION AND
RECOGNIZE THAT THERE WAS AN
OPPORTUNITY FOR US TO TO
ADVANCE SO MANY COMMUNITY GOALS
THROUGH THIS ACTION WHEN WE
RECOGNIZE THAT THE FRANCHISE
THAT IS TO SAY THE CONTRACT
GOVERNING THE RIGHT OF THE
COMPANY TO PROVIDE GAS TO THE
CITY WAS UP FOR RENEWAL IN
TWENTY TWENTY SEVEN.
>> THIS DOCUMENT THAT WE'RE
PUTTING TOGETHER TODAY THAT
WE'RE APPROVING TODAY IS
HISTORIC.
IT'S A HEATING FRANCHISE THAT
IMPROVES SAFETY.
IT IMPROVE SERVICE AND IMPROVES
RESIDENT COST AND ARE THE SOLE
RESULTS OF THE WORK.
IT WOULD BE A REAL WIN AND IT
WOULD BE ENOUGH BUT THERE IS A
GREAT DEAL MORE CRUCIALLY IT
INCLUDES AN AGREEMENT REGARDING
CLIMATE ACTION WHICH OUTLINES
COMMITMENTS BETWEEN DTI AND THE
CITY TO COOPERATE IN SUPPORT
OF OUR EIGHT TO ZERO PROGRAM.
JUST THE FIRST TWO YEARS
OF THIS WORK PLAN INCLUDES
SUBSTANTIAL FUNDING COMMITMENTS
FOR COMMUNITY GEOTHERMAL
INSTALLATION, ENERGY EFFICIENCY
IMPROVEMENTS IN RENTAL UNITS,
WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT AND
SERIOUS EXPLORATION OF A BIO
DIGESTER AT WASTEWATER
RECOVERY FACILITY.
FOR MY PART I AM PARTICULARLY
EXCITED ABOUT ITS COMMITMENT TO
BID ON CITY CITY LED GEOTHERMAL
PROJECTS.
WE LOOK FORWARD TO OURSELVES
WORKING ON THESE PROJECTS AND
LEARNING FROM THEM BUT I'M ALSO
EXCITED ABOUT PARTICIPATION IN
THEM BECAUSE THEY WILL HAVE THE
OPPORTUNITY IN THE EVENT THAT
THEY ARE SUCCESSFUL BIDDER TO
TO LEARN THAT DISTRICT
GEOTHERMAL CAN SOMEDAY PERHAPS
OUR NEXT FRANCHISE MAY NOT BE
WITH DGSE DTG GAS BUT RATHER
THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR A
NEW LINE OF BUSINESS FOR THE
COMPANY.
WELL THAT'S THE COMPANIES
THAT'S FOR THE COMPANY'S
BENEFIT.
THE LONG TERM TRANSITION FROM
GAS TO A MORE CARBON BENEFICIAL
SOURCE OF HEAT IS TO EVERYONE'S
BENEFIT AND TO THE EXTENT THAT
WE CAN GET THAT INFRASTRUCTURE
UP OFF THE GROUND IN SMALL PART
THANKS TO THIS NEW AND EXCITING
WORK, I AM INCREDIBLY GRATEFUL
AND PROUD OF IT.
FURTHER DISCUSSION COUNCIL
MEMBER.
>> THANK YOU, MAYOR.
WE KNOW THAT THERE ARE MUCH
MORE EFFICIENT AND CLEANER WAYS
TO HEAT OUR HOMES AND COOK OUR
FOOD.
BUT I WANTED TO ALSO SPEAK TO
RESIDENTS WHO MAY BE READING
THIS BECAUSE I'VE HEARD FROM
SOME OF THEM CONCERNED THAT ALL
OF A SUDDEN THEY'RE NOT GOING
TO HAVE ACCESS TO GAS IN TWENTY
THIRTY FIVE THEY'RE GOING TO BE
FORCED TO SWITCH.
>> SO WHAT THIS FRANCHISE
AGREEMENT AGREEMENT DOES AS
MANY HAVE ALREADY SAID IS IT
GIVES US FLEXIBILITY TO EXPLORE
AND TO PILOT ALTERNATIVE
HEATING AND COOLING
TECHNOLOGIES THAT ARE MORE
SAFE, HEALTHIER, MORE RELIABLE
AND ACTUALLY MORE AFFORDABLE
OVER TIME.
WE WANT TO CREATE OPTIONS THAT
PEOPLE DON'T HAVE RIGHT NOW.
AND I GUESS I ALSO WANTED TO
HIGHLIGHT ANY FUTURE CHANGES
ARE GOING TO BE GUIDED BY
CAREFUL PLANNING PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT.
YOU KNOW, WE KNOW THAT MANY
HOUSEHOLDS ARE ALREADY
STRETCHED THEN SO THE PLAN IS
NOT TO RIP SOMETHING AWAY BUT
TO PROVIDE PEOPLE WITH SAFER,
CLEANER OPTIONS IN THE FUTURE
FOR THE DISCUSSION COUNCIL ON
BRITISH I JUST WANTED TO SAY
FOUR WORDS OR MAYBE A COUPLE
MORE THAN THAT ABOUT THE BIO
DIGESTER BECAUSE THIS IS REALLY
IMPORTANT.
THIS IS ALCHEMY.
THIS IS TURNING SEWAGE INTO
ENERGY.
>> I MEAN ALCHEMY IN THE GOOD
WAY.
RIGHT.
AND WITHIN WALLENIUS THE CITY'S
BEEN TRYING TO WORK ON THIS FOR
A LONG TIME AND SO THIS GIVES A
REAL BUMP TO THAT PROJECT AND
IT MAY TURN OUT THAT IT ISN'T
FEASIBLE BUT IT WOULD BE REALLY
FANTASTIC IF IT WERE FURTHER
DISCUSSION IN FAVOR OR OPPOSED
.
IT IS APPROVED SEE AND OR
INSTRUMENTED CHAPTER NINETY
THREE ALARM SYSTEMS OF TITLE
SEVEN OF THE CITY OF THE OF THE
CITY CODE OF ORDINANCES THAT
DIFFERENT FROM THE CODE OF THE
CITY BANABA I DON'T KNOW MOVE
BY COUNCIL MEMBER HARRIS
INSPECTED BY COUNCIL MEMBER
THIS DISCUSSION I SEE ONE ON
FAVORITE POST IT'S APPROVED C
TO AN AUDIENCE TO THE MEN'S
SECTION TWO SIX THREE
OF CHAPTER TWENTY NINE WATER
RIGHTS OF TITLE TWO THE
CODE IN SYDNEY HARBOR MOVE BY
COUNCIL MEMBER I SECONDED BY
COUNCILOR DISCUSSION PLEASE
OF C TO IN FAVOR OR OPPOSED
IT'S PROVED C THREE IN ORDER TO
AMEND SECTION TWO SIX NINE
OF CHAPTER TWENTY NINE STORM
WATER RIGHTS OF TITLE TWO
OF THE CODE OF THE CITY BANABA
MOVE BY COUNCIL MEMBER SECOND
BY COUNCIL MACKENZIE HAD ONE
DISCUSSION PLEASE OF C THREE ON
FAVORITE ALL OPPOSED IS
APPROVED C FOR AN ORDINANCE TO
AMEND SECTION 264 OF CHAPTER
TWENTY NINE SEWER RATES
OF TITLE TWO OF THE CODE OF THE
CITY BANABA MOVE BY COUNCIL
MEMBER IA SECTION BY COUNCIL
MEMBER DENHA DISCUSSION PLEASE
OF C FOUR COUNCIL MEMBER MALIK
I GUESS IN RELATION TO
INCREASING FEES FOR UTILITIES
KIND OF JUST GENERALLY I HAVE A
UNIQUE VANTAGE POINT.
I AS PART OF MY DAY JOB ON THE
MICHIGAN INFRASTRUCTURE COUNCIL
AND WITH THAT VANTAGE POINT I
GET TO SEE AND COMPARE
INFRASTRUCTURE SYSTEMS ACROSS
THE STATE.
ALL OF THESE MUNICIPALITIES
OPERATE UNDER THE SAME STATE
RULES BUT OF COURSE EACH
INDIVIDUAL MUNICIPALITY GETS TO
SET KIND OF THEIR OWN RATES,
THEIR OWN RULES, THEIR OWN
ALLOCATION OF FUNDS AND SO
FORTH.
>> I'M ALWAYS VERY PLEASED TO
SEE ANN ARBOR IS AT THE TOP
OF MANY, MANY METRICS WHEN IT
COMES TO WHAT WE GET FROM OUR
UTILITIES INCLUDING CLEAN
WATER, LIMITED SEWAGE SPILLS,
ALL THE UNDESIRABLE THINGS YOU
DON'T WANT TO HAPPEN AND THE
REASON FOR HAVING THESE
UTILITIES I KNOW WHEN IT COMES
TO AFFORDABILITY THE IDEA
OF INCREASING RATES IS NOT
IDEAL BUT WE GET WHAT WE PAY
FOR AND IN ANN ARBOR IT IS MY
OPINION THAT WE GET A LOT FOR
WHAT WE PAY FOR WHEN IT COMES
TO OUR UTILITIES.
SO I'VE HAD RESIDENTS THAT YOU
KNOW, HAVE BROUGHT UP UTILITY
RATES AND THEY HAVE OFTEN BEEN
INCREASING OVER TIME BUT WITH
CHALLENGES THAT ARE MOUNTING
SUCH AS CLIMATE CHANGE, ERRATIC
RAINFALL AND STUFF ESPECIALLY
WHEN IT COMES
AN AREA WHERE THE
CITY COLLECTS THESE INCREASED
FUNDS BUT THEN INVEST THEM INTO
INFRASTRUCTURE THAT CAN WEATHER
THINGS THAT ARE COMING IN THE
FUTURE AND I THINK THAT'S A
REALLY GREAT THING AND I HAVE
SEEN LIKE I SAID FROM MY DAY
JOB THAT NOT ALL COMMUNITIES DO
THIS.
NOT ALL COMMUNITIES DO THIS
RESPONSIBLY AND I AM VERY
PLEASED TO SAY THAT I HAVE
CONFIDENCE THAT ANN ARBOR WILL
INVEST THESE INCREASED RATES
RESPONSIBLY AND CONTINUE OUR
VERY STRONG INFRASTRUCTURE INTO
THE FUTURE.
THANK YOU FOR THE DISCUSSION.
ALL IN FAVOR OR OPPOSE IT IS
APPROVED D.C. ONE RESOLUTION TO
APPOINT MOLLY ROWAN TO THE
DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
AS A NON REGISTERED ELECTOR I
JUST PREFER THAT DOFOR REFERRED
FROM THIS IS A VOTE MOVED BY
COUNCIL MEMBER DENHA SECONDED
BY COUNCILMAN REDISH DISCUSSION
IS A DC ONE COUNCILMAN RIGHT.
>> JUST NOT ACTUALLY SURE IF
EVERYONE AT THE TABLE KNOWS WHO
MOLLY IS SOMALI OR RUIN DECKERT
IS THE CEO OF THE MICHIGAN
THEATER TOOK OVER FROM US I
THINK THIS FALL SHE'S DOING AN
OUTSTANDING JOB SO FAR WE'RE
VERY EXCITED TO HAVE HER NAME
ON THE BOARD AND I'M VERY HAPPY
TO SEE HER ON THE DDA FOR THE
DISCUSSION ON FAVOR OR OPPOSED.
IT IS APPROVED WITH 11 COUNCIL
MEMBERS PRESENT CERTIFYING
SATISFYING THE SEVEN VOTE
REQUIREMENT DC TWO RESOLUTION
TO ADOPT THE FISCAL YEAR.
TWENTY FIVE CITY COUNCIL
LEGISLATIVE POLICY AGENDA MOVE
BY COUNCIL MEMBER IGHER
SECONDED BY COUNCIL MEMBER FOR
DENHA DISCUSSION PLEASE OF DC
TWO YES MARIAH THANK YOU
BRIEFLY AS AS CHAIR OF THE
COUNCIL POLICY AGENDA COMMITTEE
I'M PROUD THAT WE'RE BRINGING
FORWARD OUR TWENTY TWENTY FIVE
LEGISLATIVE POLICY AGENDA FOR
COUNCIL APPROVAL TONIGHT.
THIS AGENDA REALLY REFLECTS THE
PRIORITIES AND THE VALUES
OF OUR COMMUNITY FROM EXPANDING
AFFORDABLE HOUSING AND CLEAN
ENERGY TO PROTECTING VOTING
RIGHTS, INVESTING IN
INFRASTRUCTURE AND
STRENGTHENING WORKER
PROTECTIONS.
IT'S THE RESULT
OF COLLABORATION BETWEEN THE
COUNCIL COMMITTEE STAFF AND OUR
STATE LEGISLATIVE DELEGATION
AND I THINK IT GIVES A CLEAR
FRAMEWORK TO ADVOCATE
EFFECTIVELY AT THE STATE AND
THE FEDERAL LEVELS FOR POLICIES
THAT SUPPORT THE WORK THAT
WE'RE DOING HERE IN ANN ARBOR
AND DOLLARS TO COMPANIES THAT
WORK.
SO I WANT TO THANK EVERYONE WHO
WAS INVOLVED AND CONTRIBUTE
CONTRIBUTED TO SHAPING THIS
AGENDA AND I LOOK FORWARD TO US
PUTTING IT INTO ACTION.
>> THANK YOU, BRIGGS.
I LIKE TO THANK THE POLICY
COMMITTEE FOR PUTTING THIS
FOREHEAD'S GOOD POLICY AGENDA
AS USUAL, I DO WANT TO PROPOSE
WHAT I BELIEVE TO BE A FRIENDLY
AMENDMENT.
THIS BUDGET CAN HOPEFULLY
CIRCULATE THAT AROUND.
>> IT WOULD I WILL MOVE THE
AMENDMENTS IF THAT'S OK WHICH
IS TO UNDER HIGH PRIORITY
REPLACE ADVOCATE FOR INCREASED
LOCAL ROAD FUNDING AND LOCAL
PUBLIC TRANSIT FUNDING WITH
ADVOCATE FOR STATE INVESTMENTS
AND A SUSTAINABLE 21ST CENTURY
TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM IN
PARENTHESES INCREASED FUNDING
FOR ROAD TRANSIT AND NON
MOTORIZED.
IS THERE A SECOND TAKEN BY
COUNCIL BRACKMAN IT'S BEEN
DISTRIBUTED AND THE REASONING
BEHIND THIS AMENDMENT OBVIOUSLY
WE ARE ROAD FUNDING IS BEING
DEBATED.
THIS ALIGNS THE LINK LANGUAGE I
THINK IN OUR POLICY AGENDA
BETTER WITH OUR OWN GOALS TO A
COMPREHENSIVE FULL FUNDING
PACKAGE BUT ALSO ALIGNS IT WITH
THE LANGUAGE THAT'S BEING
THAT'S BEEN DISTRIBUTED BY A
PROGRESSIVE COALITION
OF PARTNERS ACROSS THE STATE
INCLUDING I WON'T READ ALL THE
PARTNERS BUT FOLKS LIKE THE
ECOLOGY CENTER, MICHIGAN
ENVIRONMENTAL COUNCIL, TRANSIT
RIDERS, UNITED SIERRA CLUB,
STRONG IN DETROIT ETC. ETC.
ETC. JUST TO ENSURE THAT WE'RE
USING SOME OF THE SAME LANGUAGE
WITHIN OUR POLICY AGENDA THAT'S
BEING PROMOTED ACROSS THE STATE
RIGHT NOW FOR FURTHER
DISCUSSION FOLKS THAT ARE
FRIENDLY AND FRIENDLY THE BODY
AND IT'S REALLY THANK YOU FOR
THE DISCUSSION OF THE MOTION AS
AMENDED FROM MY LETTER.
THANK VERY MUCH.
THE POLICY COMMITTEE THERE'S A
LOT OF GREAT AND GOOD WORK
THAT'S DONE AT THAT LEVEL TIME
WAS WE DID NOT HAVE THIS KIND
OF COHERENT STATEMENT OF WHAT
WE WOULD LIKE OUT OF OUR
DELEGATION AND OUR AND THE
BROADER GOVERNMENT IN LANSING
AND I THINK THAT IT IS
EXTREMELY USEFUL INNOVATION
STEP THAT WE'VE TAKEN AND IT'S
IT'S A REALLY GOOD THING.
SO THANK YOU FOR THE DISCUSSION
IN FAVOR OR OPPOSED IT IS
APPROVED DC THREE RESOLUTION TO
AUTHORIZE THE CITY
ADMINISTRATOR TO NEGOTIATE WITH
THE ANN ARBOR DISTRICT LIBRARY
FOR THE SALE OF AIR RIGHTS TO
THEM AT LIBRARY LANE
CONDITIONED ON VOTER APPROVAL
OF CHARTER AMENDMENTS APPROVED
BY COUNCIL MEMBER CORNELL
SECOND BY COUNCIL MEMBER I
DISCUSSION PLEASE OF DC THREE
THE THE THAT THAT YOU HAVE
BEFORE YOU REFLECTS IN MAJOR
PART THE PRIOR CONVERSATIONS
THAT WE'VE HAD AT THIS TABLE
ABOUT PUTTING THESE BALLOT
MEASURES TO THE VOTERS IN AT
THE AT THE NEXT ELECTION THAT
NEXT ELECTION AVAILABLE BEING
AUGUST TWENTY TWENTY FIVE AND
GIVING THE VOTERS A VERY CLEAR
UNDERSTANDING OF WHAT IT IS
THAT WE WOULD PROPOSE TO DO IN
THE EVENT THAT THEY THEY SAW
FIT TO PASS PASSED THOSE
MEASURES BROADLY WE WOULD LOOK
TO WORK TO TRANSFER THE
PROPERTY TRANSFER THE AIR
RIGHTS TO THE LIBRARY AND WOULD
ANTICIPATE THE LIBRARY THEN
CONTINUING ITS OUTSTANDING
STEWARDSHIP OF LIBRARY SERVICES
HERE IN THE CITY OF ANN ARBOR.
THEY WOULD WORK AS ARTICULATED
IN THE RESOLUTION TO CREATE A
NEW DOWNTOWN LIBRARY UTILIZING
OF COURSE THEIR CURRENT SITE
AND ADDING LIBRARY SERVICES ON
THE SITE OF THE CURRENT ROOF
OF THE PARKING STRUCTURE AT
BOTH LOCATIONS IT WOULD BE
MIXED INCOME HOUSING.
IT'S CRUCIAL TO SAY THERE WOULD
BE A SUBSTANTIAL AMOUNT
OF PUBLIC OPEN SPACE ON SITE
AND RETAIL AND LOCAL BUSINESS
INCUBATION AS WELL AS NEW
PERFORMANCE AND GATHERING
SPACES FOR MEMBERS OF THE
PUBLIC.
THE CURRENT LOCATION HAS BEEN
FOR DECADES A DEAD ZONE IN THE
CITY OF ANN ARBOR RIGHT NEXT TO
OUR OUTSTANDING LIBRARY THAT
OUTSTANDING LIBRARY IT'S
BUILDING IS NEARING THE END
OF ITS USEFUL LIFE AND THIS IS
A GREAT OPPORTUNITY FOR US TO
LEVERAGE THE GREAT AND GOOD
WORK DONE BY THE LIBRARY WITH
THE THE UNDERUTILIZED COMMUNITY
RESOURCE OF THE ROOF OF THE
PARKING STRUCTURE.
I'M INCREDIBLY EXCITED ABOUT
THE OPPORTUNITY THAT THIS
PRESENTS TO THE DOWNTOWN THE
COMMUNITY AS A WHOLE AND I LOOK
FORWARD TO ITS CONSIDERATION BY
THE VOTERS IN AUGUST FURTHER
DISCUSSION ON FAGRE OPPOSED IT
IS APPROVED
.
THANK YOU.
ONE RESOLUTION AUTHORIZING
SUMMARY PUBLICATION OF ORDER
OF ORDINANCE TWO FIVE ZERO
EIGHT AND AUDIENCE TO AMEND
SECTIONS FIVE THAT ONE FIVE
FIVE THAT ONE SIX AND CHAPTER
FIFTY FIVE UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT
CODE OF TITLE FIVE OF OF THE
CODE OF THE CITY BANABA MOVE BY
COUNCIL MEMBER DISH BY COUNCIL
MEMBER GARCI HEADLAND
DISCUSSION PLEASE OF D1 OR IN
FAVOR OR OPPOSE ITS APPROVED
DSU RESOLUTION AUTHORIZING
SUMMARY PUBLICATION
OF ORDINANCES TWO FIVE ZERO
NINE IN AUDIENCE TO AMEND
SECTION FIVE ONE SEVEN AND FIVE
TO SEVEN AND FIND THAT TO EIGHT
OF CHAPTER FIFTY FIVE UNIFIED
DEVELOPMENT CODE TITLE FIVE AND
TO REPEAL SECTION ONE TWO THREE
NINE OF CHAPTER EIGHT
REORGANIZATION OF BOARDS AND
COMMISSIONS OF TITLE ONE OF THE
CODE OF THE CITY BANABA MOVE BY
COUNCIL MEMBER SELECTED BY
COUNTY EMERGENCY HADWIN
DISCUSSION PLEASE OF HOUSE TO
WHILE IN FAVOR OR OPPOSED IT IS
APPROVED YOU HAVE THE PLEASURE
CLOSED SESSION TODAY YES PLEASE
MAY I WOULD LIKE TO REQUEST A
CLOSED SESSION UNDER MCO
FIFTEEN POINT TWO SIX EIGHT
SECTION EIGHT ONE A TO CONSIDER
MY EVALUATION.
>> THANK YOU.
MAKE THE MOTION PLEASE TO GO
INTO CLOSED SESSION ON THAT
BASIS MOVE BY COUNCIL MEMBER
CORNELL SECONDED BY COUNCIL
MEMBER WATSON GUSHIN ROGOVA
PLEASE STARTING WITH MARTELA
STARTING WITH ME TAYLOR YES
CUSTOMER IHR YES CUSTOMER YES
THAT'S CORRECT.
YES THAT'S RIGHT COLONEL.
YES CUSTOMER DISH YES WE'RE
HARRISON YES CUSTOMER WATSON
YES YES DENHA YES FELSBERG
OUTSIDE ONE YES MOTION CARRIES
SESSION
WE ARE BACK IN OPEN
SESSION DC FOR A RESOLUTION TO
FINALIZE EVALUATION REPORT AND
AMEND THE EMPLOYMENT AGREEMENT
FOR CITY ATTORNEY AT LEON
CAREER MOVE BY COUNCIL MEMBER
PASSING BY COUNCILMAN CANAL
DISCUSSION PLEASE OF FOR BEFORE
GETTING GETTING THE AMENDMENT
UNDERWAY TO FILL IN THE BLANKS
I JUST WOULD JUST VERY BRIEFLY
MYSELF AND I THINK I CAN SAY
ALSO WITHOUT FEAR
OF CONTRADICTION FROM COUNCIL
AND HONESTLY ANYBODY WHO HAS
THE PLEASURE OF OF WORKING WITH
MISS CORE HOW GRATEFUL I AM
GRATEFUL WE ALL ARE AT THE
TABLE AND THROUGHOUT THE
MUNICIPAL ORGANIZATION FOR FOR
HER SERVICE HER SERVICE TO
COUNCIL, HER COLLEAGUES AND TO
THE COMMUNITY AS A WHOLE.
HER WORK IS EXCELLENT.
SHE THE MANNER IN WHICH SHE
CONDUCTS HER OFFICE IS IS
EXCELLENT.
THE CONFIDENCE THAT SHE
INSTILLS THROUGHOUT THE
MUNICIPAL ORGANIZATION AT THIS
TABLE AND LIKE I SAID, ANYONE
WHO DOES HAVE THE PLEASURE
OF LISTENING TO HER, IT IS IT
IS A CREDIT TO US ALL.
AND SO WE AND I AM EXTREMELY
GRATEFUL FOR THE DISCUSSION
COUNCIL OVER A DENHA I WOULD
ECHO ALL OF THOSE WORDS.
I THINK ALL OF US HAVE A VERY
POSITIVE THINGS TO SAY ABOUT
OUR OUR INCREDIBLE CITY
ATTORNEY.
BUT TO GET TO THE ACTUAL
DETAILS OF THIS RESOLUTION, I
WOULD MOVE TO AMEND THE FIRST
RESOLVED CLAUSE TO READ AND
INCREASE ACTUALLY
INCREASE OH
OH WE WOULD SAY THIRTY AN
INCREASE OF THIRTY THOUSAND
DOLLARS TO THE CITY ATTORNEY'S
ANNUAL SALARY EFFECTIVE AT THE
NEXT PAY PERIOD AND TO SECTION
FOUR OF THE AGREEMENT BE
AMENDED TO ALSO PROVIDE A ONE
TIME LUMP SUM PAYMENT OF THREE
PERCENT TO THE CITY ATTORNEY'S
ADJUSTED SALARY WHICH AMOUNTS
TO SEVEN THOUSAND THREE HUNDRED
AND EIGHTY NINE DOLLARS SECOND
BY COUNCIL MEMBER WATSON
DISCUSSION OF THE AMENDMENT IN
FAVOR OR OPPOSED THE AMENDMENT
IS APPROVED FURTHER DISCUSSION
THE MAIN MOTION AS AMENDED WILL
FAVOR OPPOSED IT IS APPROVED.
WE HAVE BEFORE US THE ARE
SUPPORT OF COMMUNICATIONS
PETITIONS AND REFERRALS.
THE MOTION PLEASE TO APPROVE
THE CLERK'S SUPPORT MOVE BY
COUNCIL MEMBER QUINNELL
SECONDED BY COUNCIL MEMBER
BRINGS DISCUSSION OF SUPPORT
ALL IN FAVOR OR OPPOSED IT IS
APPROVED ARE THE COMMUNICATIONS
TODAY FROM OUR INDOMITABLE CITY
ATTORNEY?
YES THANK YOU MAYOR.
THANK YOU COUNCILOR FOR PLACING
YOUR TRUST IN ME.
I WILL ENDEAVOR TO CONTINUE
DOING MY BEST BRINGING MORE
THAN MY BEST TO THE CITY THAT I
GREATLY LOVE AND TO ITS
RESIDENTS WHOSE ADVOCACY AND
INTEREST IN PUBLIC AFFAIRS
CONTINUE TO AMAZE INSPIRE ME.
BUT THANK YOU FOR PRESENTING
CHALLENGING OPPORTUNITIES AND
FOR TRUSTING OUR OFFICE.
>> I ALSO REALLY WANT TO THANK
THE TEAM THAT CARRY ME ON THEIR
SHOULDERS EVERY BUT THANK YOU
SO MUCH.
>> I WOULD ALSO LIKE TO DRAW
YOUR ATTENTION TO ESSEX WHICH
IS WHERE APPROVAL OF THE BALLOT
LANGUAGE FOR THE CENTER OF THE
CITY.
>> THANK YOU FOR THIS.
WELL I GUESS THERE IS NO
FURTHER DISCUSSION IN THE
ABSENCE OF PUBLIC COMMENT
OVERFLOW WE HAVE A MOTION TO
ADJOURN PLEASE MOVE BY
COUNCILOR BRIGGS DISCUSSION ON
FAVOR POSED TO ADJOURNED